DOMAIN NEWS The globalCOVID pandemic also known as thecoronavirus pandemic , caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus SARS CoV , began with an outbreak inWuhan, China, in December . It spread to other parts of Asia andthen worldwidein early . TheWorld Health Organization WHO declared the outbreak apublic health emergency of international concern PHEIC on January and assessed it as having become apandemicon March. The WHO declared that the public health emergency caused by COVID had ended in May , while noting that COVID continued to be a global health threat. COVID symptomsrange fromasymptomaticto deadly, but most commonly include fever,sore throat,nocturnal cough, and fatigue.Transmission of the virusis oftenthrough airborne particles. Mutations haveproduced many strains variants with varying degrees of infectivity andvirulence. COVID vaccineswere developed rapidly anddeployedto the general public beginning in December , made available through government andinternationalprogrammes such asCOVAX, aiming to providevaccine equity.Treatmentsincludenovel antiviral drugsand symptom control. Common mitigation measures during the public health emergency includedtravel restrictions,lockdowns, business restrictions and closures,workplace hazard controls,mask mandates, quarantines,testingsystems, andcontact tracingof the infected. The pandemic caused severesocialandeconomic disruptionaround the world, includingthe largest global recessionsince theGreat Depression. Widespread supply shortages, includingfood shortages, were caused bysupply chain disruptionsandpanic buying. Reduced human activity led to anunprecedented temporary decrease in pollution. Educational institutions and public areas were partially or fullyclosed in many jurisdictions, and many events were cancelled or postponed during and .Teleworkbecame much more common forwhite collar workersas the pandemic evolved.Misinformation circulatedthrough social media and occasionally through mass media, andpolitical tensions intensified. The pandemic raised issues ofracial and geographic discrimination,health equity, and the balance betweenpublic healthimperatives andindividual rights. The disease has continued to circulate since . By , experts generally believed the pandemic to be over, having transitioned into theendemic phase. Different definitions of pandemics lead to different determinations of when they end. As of July , COVID has caused,, confirmed deaths and . to .million estimated deaths. The pandemic was the fifth deadliest pandemic or epidemic in history. Terminology Pandemic Inepidemiology, apandemicis defined as an epidemic occurring over a very wide area, crossing international boundaries, and usually affecting a large number of people . During the COVID pandemic, as with other pandemics, the meaning of this term has been challenged. The end of a pandemic or other epidemic only rarely involves the total disappearance of a disease and, historically, much less attention has been given to defining the ends of epidemics than their beginnings. The ends of particular epidemics have been defined in a variety of ways, differing according to academic field, and differently based on location and social group. An epidemic's end can be considered a social phenomenon, not just a biological one. Timereported in March that expert opinions differ on whether COVID is currently considered endemic or pandemic, and that the WHO continued to call the disease a pandemic on its website. Virus names Duringthe initial outbreakinWuhan, the virus and disease were commonly referred to as coronavirus , Wuhan coronavirus , the coronavirus outbreak and the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak , with the disease sometimes called Wuhanpneumonia . In January , the WHO recommended nCoV and nCoV acute respiratory disease as interim names for the virus and disease per international guidelines against using geographical locations e.g. Wuhan, China , animal species, or groups of people in disease and virus names in part to preventsocial stigma. The WHO finalised the official names COVID and SARS CoV on February . WHO Director GeneralTedros Ghebreyesusexplained COforcorona, VIforvirus, Dfordiseaseand for when the outbreak was first identified December . The WHO additionally uses the COVID virus and the virus responsible for COVID in public communications. The WHO namedvariants of concernandvariants of interestusingGreek letters. The initial practice of naming them according to where the variants were identified e.g.Deltabegan as the Indian variant is no longer common. A more systematic naming scheme reflects the variant'sPANGO lineage e.g.,Omicron's lineage is B... and is used for other variants. Epidemiology Background SARS CoV is a virus closely related tobat coronaviruses, pangolincoronaviruses, andSARS CoV. The first knownoutbreak the COVID outbreak in mainland China started inWuhan, Hubei, China, in December . Many early cases were linked to people who had visited theHuanan Seafood Wholesale Marketthere, but it is possible that human to human transmission began earlier. Molecular clockanalysis suggests that the first cases were likely to have been between October and November . The scientific consensus is that the virus is most likely of azoonoticorigin, from bats or another closely related mammal. While other explanations, such as speculations that SARS CoV was accidentallyreleased from a laboratory, have been proposed, as of these were not sufficiently supported by evidence. Cases Official case counts refer to the number of people who have beentested for COVID and whose test has been confirmed positive according to official protocols whether they experienced symptomatic disease. Due to the effect ofsampling bias, studies which obtain a more accurate number by extrapolating from a random sample have consistently found that total infections considerably exceed the reported case counts. Many countries, early on, had official policies to not test those with only mild symptoms. The strongest risk factors for severe illness are obesity,complications of diabetes, anxiety disorders, and the total number of conditions. During the start of the COVID pandemic, it was not clear whether young people were less likely to be infected, or less likely to develop symptoms and be tested. A retrospectivecohort studyin China found thatchildrenand adults were just as likely to be infected. Among more thorough studies,preliminary resultsfrom April found that inGangelt, the centre of a major infection cluster in Germany, per cent of a population sample tested positive forantibodies. Screening for COVID in pregnant womenin New York City, andblood donorsin the Netherlands, found rates of positive antibody tests that indicated more infections than reported. Seroprevalence based estimates are conservative as some studies show that persons with mild symptoms do not have detectable antibodies. Initial estimates of thebasic reproduction number R for COVID in January were between . and ., but a subsequent analysis claimed that it may be about . with a per centconfidence intervalof . to . . In December , the number of cases continued to climb due to several factors, including new COVID variants. As of that December, ,, individuals worldwide had been confirmed as infected. As of April update , over million cases were confirmed globally. Most cases are unconfirmed, with theInstitute for Health Metrics and Evaluationestimating the true number of cases as of early to be in the billions. One measure that public health officials and policymakers have used to monitor the pandemic and guide decision making is the test positivity rate percent positive . According to Johns Hopkins in , one benchmark for a too high per cent positive is , which was used by the WHO in the past. Deaths As of March , more than.million deaths had been attributed to COVID . The first confirmed death was in Wuhan on January . These numbers vary by region and over time, influenced by testing volume, healthcare system quality, treatment options, government response, time since the initial outbreak, and population characteristics, such as age, sex, and overall health. Multiple measures are used to quantify mortality. Official death counts typically include people who died after testing positive. Such counts exclude deaths without a test. Conversely, deaths of people who died from underlying conditions following a positive test may be included. Countries such as Belgium include deaths from suspected cases, including those without a test, thereby increasing counts. Official death counts have been claimed to underreport the actual death toll, becauseexcess mortality the number of deaths in a period compared to a long term average data show an increase in deaths that is not explained by COVID deaths alone. Using such data, estimates of the true number of deaths from COVID worldwide have included a range from . to .million .million by January byThe Economist, as well as over .million by April by theInstitute for Health Metrics and Evaluation and .million earlier deaths between January , and December , by a comprehensive international study. Such deaths include deaths due to healthcare capacity constraints and priorities, as well as reluctance to seek care to avoid possible infection . Further research may help distinguish the proportions directly caused by COVID from those caused by indirect consequences of the pandemic. In May , the WHO estimated the number of excess deaths by the end of to be .million compared to .million reported COVID deaths, with the majority of the unreported .million deaths believed to be direct deaths due to the virus, rather than indirect deaths. Some deaths were becausepeople with other conditions could not access medical services. A December WHOstudy estimated excess deaths from the pandemic during and , again concluding .million excess early deaths occurred, reaffirming and detailing their prior calculations from May as well as updating them, addressing criticisms. These numbers do not include measures likeyears of potential life lostand may make the pandemic 'sleading cause of death. The time between symptom onset and death ranges from to days, typically about days. Mortality rates increase as a function of age. People at the greatest mortality risk are the elderly and those with underlying conditions. Theinfection fatality ratio IFR is the cumulative number of deaths attributed to the disease divided by the cumulative number of infected individuals including asymptomatic and undiagnosed infections and excluding vaccinated infected individuals . It is expressed in percentage points. Other studies refer to this metric as theinfection fatality risk. In November , a review article inNaturereported estimates of population weighted IFRs for various countries, excluding deaths in elderly care facilities, and found a median range of . to . . IFRs rise as a function of age from . at age and . at age , to . at age , . at age , . at age , and at age . These rates vary by a factor of , across the age groups. For comparison, the IFR for middle aged adults is two orders of magnitude higher than the annualised risk of a fatal automobile accident and much higher than the risk of dying fromseasonal influenza. In December , a systematic review and meta analysis estimated that population weighted IFR was . to in some countries France, Netherlands, New Zealand, and Portugal , to in other countries Australia, England, Lithuania, and Spain , and about . in Italy. This study reported that most of the differences reflected corresponding differences in the population's age structure and the age specific pattern of infections. There have also been reviews that have compared the fatality rate of this pandemic with prior pandemics, such as MERS CoV. For comparison the infection mortality rate of seasonal flu in the United States is . , which is times lower than COVID . Another metric in assessing death rate is thecase fatality ratio CFR , a which is the ratio of deaths to diagnoses. This metric can be misleading because of the delay between symptom onset and death and because testing focuses on symptomatic individuals. Based onJohns Hopkins Universitystatistics, the global CFR was.percent ,,deaths for,,cases as of March . The number varies by region and has generally declined over time. Disease Variants Several variants have been named by WHO and labelled as avariant of concern VoC or avariant of interest VoI . Many of these variants have shared the more infectiousDG. As of May , the WHO had downgraded all variants of concern to previously circulating as these were no longer detected in new infections. Sub lineages of the Omicron variant BA. BA. were considered separate VoCs by the WHO until they were downgraded in March as no longer widely circulating. As of September update , thevariantsof interest as specified by the WHO are BA.. and JN., and the variants under monitoring are JN.., KP., KP., KP..., JN.., LB., and XEC. Signs and symptoms Symptoms of COVID are variable, ranging from mild symptoms to severe illness. Common symptoms include headache,loss of smellandtaste,nasal congestionandrunny nose, cough,muscle pain,sore throat, fever,diarrhoea, andbreathing difficulties. People with the same infection may have different symptoms, and their symptoms may change over time. Three common clusters of symptoms have been identified one respiratory symptom cluster with cough,sputum, shortness of breath, and fever a musculoskeletal symptom cluster with muscle and joint pain, headache, and fatigue a cluster of digestive symptoms with abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhoea. In people without prior ear, nose, and throat disorders,loss of tastecombined withloss of smellis associated withCOVID and is reported in as many as of cases. Transmission The disease is mainly transmitted via the respiratory route when people inhale droplets and small airborne particles that form anaerosol that infected people exhale as they breathe, talk, cough, sneeze, or sing. Infected people are more likely to transmit COVID when they are physically close to other non infected individuals. However, infection can occur over longer distances, particularly indoors. Cause SARS CoV severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus belongs to the broad family of viruses known ascoronaviruses. It is apositive sense single stranded RNA ssRNA virus, with a single linear RNA segment. Coronaviruses infect humans, other mammals, including livestock and companion animals, and avian species. Human coronaviruses are capable of causing illnesses ranging from thecommon coldto more severe diseases such asMiddle East respiratory syndrome MERS, fatality rate . SARS CoV is the seventh known coronavirus to infect people, afterE,NL,OC,HKU,MERS CoV, and the originalSARS CoV. Diagnosis The standard method of testing for presence of SARS CoV is anucleic acid test, which detects the presence of viral RNA fragments. As these tests detect RNA but not infectious virus, its ability to determine duration of infectivity of patients is limited . The test is typically done on respiratory samples obtained by anasopharyngeal swab however, a nasal swab or sputum sample may also be used. The WHO has published several testing protocols for the disease. Prevention Preventive measures to reduce the chances of infection include getting vaccinated, staying at home, or spending more time outdoors, avoiding crowded places, keeping distance from others, wearing a mask in public, ventilating indoor spaces, managing potential exposure durations, washing hands with soap and water often and for at least twenty seconds, practising good respiratory hygiene, and avoiding touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. Those diagnosed with COVID or who believe they may be infected are advised by healthcare authorities to stay home except to get medical care call ahead before visiting a healthcare provider wear a face mask before entering the healthcare provider's office when in any room or vehicle with another person, cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue regularly wash hands with soap and water and avoid sharing personal household items. A COVID vaccineis intended to provideacquired immunityagainstSARS CoV severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus SARS CoV , the virus that causes coronavirus disease COVID . Prior to the COVID pandemic, an established body of knowledge existed about the structure and function ofcoronavirusescausing diseases likesevere acute respiratory syndrome SARS andMiddle East respiratory syndrome MERS . This knowledge accelerated the development of variousvaccine platformsduring early . The initial focus of SARS CoV vaccines was on preventing symptomatic and severe illness. The COVID vaccines are widely credited for their role in reducing the severity and death caused by COVID . As of August , more than .billion people had received one or more doses .billion in total . The Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine was the most widely used. According to a June study, COVID vaccines prevented an additional .million to .million deaths in countries and territories from December to December . In , the first recombinant protein based COVID vaccine theNovavax vaccine was authorised for use in adults in the United Kingdom. It has subsequently received endorsement authorisation from the WHO, US, European Union, and Australia. That same year also saw the first inhalable vaccine, developed by Chinese biopharmaceutical companyCanSino Biologics. High income countries rapidly bought up vaccines at the start of the pandemic, leading to concerns aboutvaccine equity. By April , one in people inlow and middle income countrieshad been vaccinated, compared with one in four in high income countries. Treatment For the first two years of the pandemic, no specific and effective treatment or cure was available. In , the European Medicines Agency's EMA Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use CHMP approved the oral antiviralprotease inhibitor,Paxlovid nirmatrelvir plus the HIV antiviralritonavir , to treat adult patients. FDA later gave it an EUA. Most cases of COVID are mild. In these, supportive care includes medication such asparacetamolorNSAIDsto relieve symptoms fever, body aches, cough , adequate intake of oral fluids, and rest. Good personal hygiene and ahealthy dietare also recommended. Supportive carein severe cases includes treatment torelieve symptoms,fluid therapy,oxygen support,prone positioning, and medications or devices to support other affected vital organs. More severe cases may need treatment in hospital. In those with low oxygen levels, use of the glucocorticoiddexamethasoneis recommended to reduce mortality. Noninvasive ventilationand, ultimately, admission to anintensive care unitformechanical ventilationmay be required to support breathing. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation ECMO has been used to address the issue of respiratory failure. Existing drugs such ashydroxychloroquine,lopinavir ritonavir, andivermectinare not recommended by US or European health authorities, as there is no good evidence they have any useful effect. The antiviralremdesiviris available in the US, Canada, Australia, and several other countries, with varying restrictions however, it is not recommended for use with mechanical ventilation, and is discouraged altogether by the WHO, due to limited evidence of its efficacy. Prognosis The severity of COVID varies. It may take a mild course with few or no symptoms, resembling other common upper respiratory diseases such as thecommon cold. In of cases . for those over age symptoms are severe enough to cause hospitalisation. Mild cases typically recover within two weeks, while those with severe or critical diseases may take three to six weeks to recover. Among those who have died, the time from symptom onset to death has ranged from two to eight weeks. Prolongedprothrombintime and elevatedC reactive proteinlevels on admission to the hospital are associated with severe course of COVID and with a transfer tointensive care units ICU . Between and of COVID patients experiencelong COVID, a condition characterised by long termconsequencespersisting after the typical convalescence period of the disease. The most commonly reported clinical presentations arefatigueand memory problems, as well asmalaise, headaches,shortness of breath, loss of smell,muscle weakness, low fever, andcognitive dysfunction. Strategies Many countries attempted to slow or stop the spread of COVID by recommending, mandating, or prohibiting behaviour changes, while others relied primarily on providing information. Measures ranged from public advisories to stringent lockdowns. Outbreak control strategies are divided into elimination and mitigation. Experts differentiate between elimination strategies known as zero COVID that aim to completely stop the spread of the virus within the community, , and mitigation strategies commonly known as flattening the curve that attempt to lessen the effects of the virus on society, but which still tolerate some level of transmission within the community. These initial strategies can be pursued sequentially or simultaneously during theacquired immunity phasethrough natural andvaccine induced immunity. Naturereported in that of researchers who responded to a survey think that the coronavirus will becomeendemic . Containment Containment is undertaken to stop an outbreak from spreading into the general population. Infected individuals are isolated while they are infectious. The people they have interacted with are contacted and isolated for long enough to ensure that they are either not infected or no longer contagious. Screening is the starting point for containment. Screening is done by checking for symptoms to identify infected individuals, who can then be isolated or offered treatment. The zero COVID strategy involves using public health measures such ascontact tracing,mass testing,border quarantine,lockdowns, andmitigation softwareto stopcommunity transmissionof COVID as soon as it is detected, with the goal of getting the area back to zero detected infections and resuming normal economic and social activities. Successful containment or suppression reducesRtto less than . Mitigation Should containment fail, efforts focus on mitigation measures taken to slow the spread and limit its effects on the healthcare system and society. Successful mitigation delays and decreases the epidemic peak, known as flattening theepidemic curve . This decreases the risk of overwhelming health services and provides more time for developing vaccines and treatments. Individual behaviour changed in many jurisdictions. Many people worked from home instead of at their traditional workplaces. Non pharmaceutical interventionsthat may reduce spread include personal actions such as wearingface masks, self quarantine, andhand hygiene community measures aimed at reducing interpersonal contacts such as closing workplaces and schools and cancelling large gatherings community engagement to encourage acceptance and participation in such interventions as well as environmental measures such as surface cleaning. More drastic actions, such as quarantining entire populations and strict travel bans have been attempted in various jurisdictions. TheChineseandAustralian government approacheshave included many lockdowns and are widely considered the most strict. TheNew Zealand government responseincluded the most severe travel restrictions. As part of itsK Quarantineprogramme, South Korea introduced mass screening and localised quarantines, and issued alerts on the movements of infected individuals. TheSingaporean government's responseincluded so called circuit breaker lockdowns and financial support for those affected while also imposing large fines for those who broke quarantine. Contact tracingattempts to identify recent contacts of newly infected individuals, and to screen them for infection the traditional approach is to request a list of contacts from infectees, and then telephone or visit the contacts. Contact tracing was widely used during theWestern African Ebola virus epidemicin . Another approach is to collect location data from mobile devices to identify those who have come in significant contact with infectees, which prompted privacy concerns. On April , Google andAppleannounced an initiative for privacy preserving contact tracing. In Europe and in the US,Palantir Technologiesinitially provided COVID tracking services. Health care WHO described increasing capacity and adapting healthcare as a fundamental mitigation. The ECDC and WHO's European regional office issued guidelines for hospitals andprimary healthcareservices for shifting resources at multiple levels, including focusing laboratory services toward testing, canceling elective procedures, separating and isolating patients, and increasingintensive carecapabilities by training personnel and increasingventilatorsand beds. The pandemic drove widespread adoption oftelehealth. Due tosupply chaincapacity limitations, some manufacturers beganD printingmaterial such as nasal swabs and ventilator parts. In one example, an Italian startup received legal threats due to allegedpatent infringementafter reverse engineering and printing one hundred requested ventilator valves overnight. Individuals and groups ofmakerscreated and sharedopen sourcedesigns, and manufacturing devices using locally sourced materials, sewing, and D printing. Millions offace shields, protective gowns, and masks were made. Other ad hoc medical supplies included shoe covers, surgical caps,powered air purifying respirators, andhand sanitiser. Novel devices were created such asear savers,non invasive ventilationhelmets, and ventilator splitters. Herd immunity In July , several experts expressed concern that achievingherd immunitymay not be possible because Delta can transmit among vaccinated individuals. CDC published data showing that vaccinated people could transmit Delta, something officials believed was less likely with other variants. Consequently, WHO and CDC encouraged vaccinated people to continue with non pharmaceutical interventions such as masking, social distancing, and quarantining if exposed. History Theoutbreakwas discovered in Wuhan in November . It is possible that human to human transmission was happening before the discovery. Based on a retrospective analysis starting from December , the number of cases in Hubei gradually increased, reaching by December and at least by December. Apneumoniacluster was observed on December and treated by Chinese pulmonologistZhang Jixian. She informed the Wuhan Jianghan CDC on December. After analysing pneumonia patient samples, a genetic sequencing company named Vision Medicals reported the discovery of anovel coronavirusto theChina CDC CCDC on December. Two days later, a test report from CapitalBio Medlab addressed to theWuhan Central Hospitalreported an erroneous positive result forSARS, causing doctors there to alert authorities. Eight of those doctors, including ophthalmologistLi Wenliang , were detained by police on January for spreading false rumours . That evening, Wuhan Municipal Health Commission WMHC issued a notice about the treatment of pneumonia of unknown cause . The next day, WMHC made the announcement public, confirming cases enough to trigger an investigation. On December, the WHO office in China was notified about the cluster of unknown pneumonia cases and immediately launched an investigation. Official Chinese sources claimed that the early cases were mostly linked to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, which also sold live animals. In May , CCDC director George Gao initially ruled out the market as a possible origin, as animal samples collected there had tested negative. On January, WHO was notified by the Chinese National Health Commission that the outbreak was associated with exposures in the market, and that China had identified a new type of coronavirus, which it isolated on January. Initially, the number of cases doubled approximately every seven and a half days. In early and mid January, the virus spread to otherChinese provinces, helped by theChinese New Year migration. Wuhan was a transport hub and major rail interchange. On January, the virus' genome was shared publicly. A retrospective study published in March found that , people had reported symptoms by January. A January report indicated human transmission was likely occurring, and recommendedpersonal protective equipmentfor health workers. It also advocated testing, given the outbreak's pandemic potential . On January, , infections had been confirmed, leading WHO to declare the outbreak aPublic Health Emergency of International Concern PHEIC , upgrading it to a pandemic on March. On January, the first published modelling study warned of inevitable independent self sustaining outbreaks in major cities globally and called for large scale public health interventions . By January, Italy indicated its first confirmed infections had occurred, in two tourists from China. On March, Italy overtook China as the country with the most reported deaths. By March, the United States had overtaken China and Italy as the country with the highest number of confirmed infections. Genomic analysis indicated that the majority ofNew York's confirmed infections came from Europe, rather than directly from Asia. Testing of prior samples revealed a person who was infected in France on December and a person in the United States who died from the disease on February. In October, WHO reported that one in ten people around the world may have been infected, or million people, while only million infections had been confirmed. On November, Pfizer released trial results for a candidate vaccine, showing a per cent effectiveness in preventing infection. That day, Novavax submitted an FDA Fast Track application for their vaccine. On December,Public Health Englandreported that a variant had been discovered in the UK's southeast, predominantly inKent. The variant, later namedAlpha, showed changes to thespike proteinthat could make the virus more infectious. As of December, , infections had been confirmed in the UK. On February , US Secretary of Health and Human ServicesAlex Azarwaived liability for vaccine manufacturers in all cases except those involving willful misconduct . On January, theAlpha variant, first discovered in the UK, had been identified in countries. On January, theGamma variantwas first identified in Japanese travellers returning from Brazil. On January, it was reported that the Novavax vaccine was per cent effective against theBeta variantin a clinical trial in South Africa. TheCoronaVac vaccinewas reported to be . per cent effective in a Brazil clinical trial. On March, several countries stopped using theOxford AstraZeneca COVID vaccinedue to blood clotting problems, specificallycerebral venous sinus thrombosis CVST . On March, the WHO and European Medicines Agency found no link tothrombosis, leading several countries to resume administering the vaccine. In March WHO reported that an animal host was the most likely origin, without ruling out other possibilities. TheDelta variantwas first identified in India. In mid April, the variant was first detected in the UK and two months later it had become a full fledged third wave in the country, forcing the government to delay reopening that was originally scheduled for June. On November, Germany advised against theModerna vaccinefor people under , due to a possible association withmyocarditis. On November, theOmicron variantwas detected in South Africa a few days later the WHO declared it a VoC variant of concern . The new variant is more infectious than the Delta variant. On January, Europe passed million cases amid a surge in theOmicron variant. Later that month, the WHO recommended therheumatoid arthritisdrugbaricitinibfor severe or critical patients. It also recommended the monoclonal antibodysotrovimabin patients with non severe disease, but only those who are at highest risk of hospitalisation. On January, theInstitute for Health Metrics and Evaluationestimated that about of the world's population had been infected by COVID . By March, it was reported that the total worldwide death count had surpassed million people. By July, Omicron subvariantsBA.andBA.had spread worldwide. WHO Director General Tedros Ghebreyesus stated on September , that The world has never been in a better position to end the pandemic , citing the lowest number of weekly reported deaths since March . He continued, We are not there yet. But the end is in sight we can see the finish line . On October, the United States surpassed million cases of COVID , the most cases of any country. By October, the worldwide daily death toll was , the lowest since deaths were reported on March . November marked the three year anniversary since health officials in China first detected COVID . On November, the WHO reported that deaths since the month of February had dropped per cent. Director General Tedros said this was cause for optimism . On December, the WHO indicated that, at least of the world's population has some level of immunity to Sars CoV . In early December, China began lifting some of its most stringent lockdown measures. Subsequent data from China's health authorities revealed that million people, nearly per cent of its population, had been infected in the first days of that month. On December, the US joined Italy, Japan, Taiwan, and India in requiring negative COVID test results from all people travelling from China due to the new surge in cases. The EU refused similar measures, stating that the BF omicron variant had already spread throughout Europe without becoming dominant. On January , the WHO said the information shared by China during the recent surge in infections lacked data, such as hospitalisation rates. On January, the WHO's Europe office said the recent viral surge in China posed no immediate threat. On January, the WHO recommended that China monitor excess mortality to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the impact of COVID . On January, the three year anniversary of the original declaration, the WHO determined that COVID still met the criteria for a public health emergency of international concern PHEIC . On March, WHO Director General Tedros indicated he was confident the COVID pandemic would cease to be a public health emergency by the end of the year. On May, the WHO downgraded COVID from being a global health emergency, though it continued to refer to it as a pandemic. The WHO does not make official declarations of when pandemics end. The decision came after Tedros convened with the International Health Regulations Emergency Committee, wherein the Committee noted that due to the decrease in deaths and hospitalisations, and the prevalence of vaccinations and the level of general immunity, it was time to remove the emergency designation and transition to long term management . Tedros agreed, and the WHO reduced the classification to an established and ongoing health issue . In a press conference, Tedros remarked that the diminishing threat from COVID had allowed most countries to return to life as we knew it before COVID . In September the WHO said it had observed concerning trends in COVID case numbers and hospitalisations, although analysis was hampered because many countries were no longer recording COVID case statistics. In November , in response to viral mutations and changing characteristics of infection, the WHO adjusted its treatment guidelines. Among other changes, remdesivir and molnupiravirwere now recommended only for the most severe cases, anddeuremidevirand ivermectin were recommended against. Responses National reactions ranged from strict lockdowns to public education campaigns. WHO recommended that curfews and lockdowns should be short term measures to reorganise, regroup, rebalance resources, and protect the health care system. As of March , .billion people worldwide were under some form of lockdown. This increased to .billion people by the first week of April more than half theworld's population. In several countries,protests rose against restrictionssuch as lockdowns. A February study found that protests against restrictions were likely to directly increase the spread of the virus. Asia As of the end of , Asia's peak had come at the same time and at the same level as the world as a whole, in May . However, cumulatively they had experienced only half of the global average in cases. China opted for containment, instituting strict lockdowns to eliminate viral spread. The vaccines distributed in China included theBIBP,WIBP, andCoronaVac. It was reported on December , that China had vaccinated .billion of its citizens, or . of the total population of the country against COVID . China's large scale adoption ofzero COVIDhad largely contained the first waves of infections of the disease. When the waves of infections due to theOmicron variantfollowed, China was almost alone in pursuing the strategy of zero Covid to combat the spread of the virus in . Lockdown continued to be employed in November to combat a new wave of cases however,protests erupted in cities across Chinaover the country's stringent measures, and in December that year, the country relaxed its zero COVID policy. On December , the Chinese State Council narrowed its definition of what would be counted as a COVID death to include solely respiratory failure, which led to scepticism by health experts of the government's total death count at a time when hospitals reported being overwhelmed with cases following the abrupt discontinuation of zero COVID. The first case in India was reported on January . India ordered a nationwide lockdown starting March , with a phased unlock beginning June . Six cities accounted for around half of reported cases Mumbai,Delhi,Ahmedabad,Chennai,PuneandKolkata. Post lockdown, the Government of India introduced a contact tracking app calledAarogya Setuto help authorities manage contact tracing and vaccine distribution. India's vaccination programme was considered to be the world's largest and most successful with over of citizens getting the first dose and another getting the second dose. A second wave hit India in April , straining healthcare services. On October , it was reported that the country had surpassed billion vaccinations. Iran reported its first confirmed cases on February , inQom. Early measures included the cancellation closure of concerts and other cultural events, Friday prayers, and school and university campuses. Iran became a centre of the pandemic in February . More than ten countries had traced their outbreaks to Iran by February, indicating a more severe outbreak than the reported cases. TheIranian Parliamentclosed, after of its members tested positive on March . At least twelve sitting or former Iranian politicians and government officials had died by March . By August , the pandemic's fifth wave peaked, with more than deaths in day. COVID was confirmed in South Korea on January . Military bases were quarantined after tests showed three infected soldiers. South Korea introduced what was then considered the world's largest and best organised screening programme, isolating infected people, and tracing and quarantining contacts. Screening methods included mandatory self reporting by new international arrivals through mobile application, combined withdrive throughtesting, and increasing testing capability to , people day. Despite some early criticisms, South Korea's programme was considered a success in controlling the outbreak without quarantining entire cities. Europe The COVID pandemic arrived in Europe with its first confirmed case inBordeaux,France, on January , and subsequently spread widely across the continent. By March , every country in Europe had confirmed a case, and all had reported at least one death, with the exception ofVatican City. Italy was the first European nation to experience a major outbreak in early , becoming the first country worldwide to introduce a nationallockdown. By March , the WHO declared Europe the epicentre of the pandemic and it remained so until the WHO announced it had been overtaken bySouth Americaon May. By March , more than million people were inlockdownin Europe. Despitedeployment of COVID vaccines, Europe became the pandemic's epicentre once again in late . TheItalian outbreakbegan on January , when two Chinese tourists tested positive for SARS CoV in Rome. Cases began to rise sharply, which prompted the government to suspend flights to and from China and declare a state of emergency. On February , the Council of Ministers announced a new decree law to contain the outbreak, which quarantined more than , people in northern Italy. On March, the Italian government ordered schools and universities closed as Italy reached a hundred deaths. Sport was suspended completely for at least one month. On March, Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte closed down nearly all commercial activity except supermarkets and pharmacies. On April, the first wave ebbed, as day deaths declined to . On October, the Italian government again issued restrictive rules to contain the second wave. On November, Italy surpassed million confirmed infections. On November, it was reported that the second wave of the virus had led some hospitals to stop accepting patients. The virus was first confirmed to have spread to Spain on January , when a German tourist tested positive for SARS CoV onLa Gomerain the Canary Islands. Post hoc genetic analysis has shown that at least strains of the virus had been imported, andcommunity transmissionbegan by mid February. On March, it was announced that, beginning the following day, all non essential workers were ordered to remain at home for the next days. The number of cases increased again in July in a number of cities includingBarcelona,Zaragoza, andMadrid, which led to reimposition of some restrictions but no national lockdown. By September , Spain was one of the countries with the highest percentage of its population vaccinated fully vaccinated and with the first dose . Italy is ranked second at . Sweden differed from most other European countries in that it mostly remained open. Per theSwedish constitution, thePublic Health Agency of Swedenhas autonomy that prevents political interference and the agency favoured remaining open. The Swedish strategy focused on longer term measures, based on the assumption that after lockdown the virus would resume spreading, with the same result. By the end of June, Sweden no longer hadexcess mortality. Devolution in the United Kingdommeant that each of its fourcountriesdeveloped its own response. England's restrictions were shorter lived than the others. TheUK governmentstarted enforcing social distancing and quarantine measures on March . On March, Prime MinisterBoris Johnsonadvised against non essential travel and social contact, praisingwork from homeand avoiding venues such as pubs, restaurants, and theatres. On March, the government ordered all leisure establishments to close, and promised to prevent unemployment. On March, Johnson banned gatherings and restricted non essential travel and outdoor activity. Unlike previous measures, these restrictions were enforceable by police through fines and dispersal of gatherings. Most non essential businesses were ordered to close. On April , it was reported that a promising vaccine trial had begun in England the government pledged more than million toward research. On April , it was reported that the UK would have first access to the Oxford vaccine, due to a prior contract should the trial be successful, some million doses would be available. On December , the UK became the first developed country to approve the Pfizer vaccine , doses were immediately available for use. In August it was reported that viral infection cases had declined in the UK. North America The virus arrived in theUnited Stateson January . Cases were reported in all North American countries afterSaint Kitts and Nevisconfirmed a case on March, and in all North American territories afterBonaireconfirmed a case on April. PerOur World in Data,,, confirmed cases have been reported in the United States with,, deaths, the most of any country, andthe nineteenth highestper capita worldwide. COVID is thedeadliest pandemic in US history it was the third leading cause of death in the US in , behind heart disease and cancer. From to , US life expectancy dropped by years for Hispanic Americans, .years for African Americans, and .years for white Americans. These effects have persisted as US deaths due to COVID in exceeded those in . In the United States, COVID vaccines became available under emergency use in December , beginning thenational vaccination programme. The first COVID vaccine was officially approved by theFood and Drug Administrationon August . By November , while cases in the U.S. had declined, COVID variants BQ. BQ.. had become dominant in the country. In March , as cases of community transmission were confirmed acrossCanada, all of its provinces and territories declared states of emergency. Provinces and territories, to varying degrees, implemented school and daycare closures, prohibitions on gatherings, closures of non essential businesses, and restrictions on entry. Canada severely restricted its border access, barring travellers from all countries with some exceptions. Cases surged across Canada, notably in the provinces ofBritish Columbia,Alberta,QuebecandOntario, with the formation of theAtlantic Bubble, atravel restrictedarea of the country formed of the fourAtlantic provinces . Vaccine passports were adopted in all provinces and two of the territories. Per a report on November , Canadian health authorities saw a surge in influenza, while COVID was expected to rise during winter. South America The COVID pandemic was confirmed to have reached South America on February , when Brazil confirmed a case inS o Paulo. By April, all countries and territories in South America had recorded at least one case. On May , it was reported that Latin America and theCaribbeanhad reported over , cases of COVID infection with , deaths. On May , citing the rapid increase ofinfections in Brazil, the WHO declared South America the epicentre of the pandemic. As of July , South America had recorded ,, confirmed cases and ,, deaths from COVID . Due to a shortage of testing and medical facilities, it is believed that the outbreak is far larger than the official numbers show. The virus was confirmed to have spread to Brazil on February , when a man fromS o Paulowho had travelled to Italy tested positive for the virus. The disease had spread to everyfederative unit of Brazilby March. On June , the country reported its one millionth case and nearly , reported deaths. One estimate ofunder reportingwas . of total reported COVID mortality in . As of July , Brazil, with,, confirmed cases and, deaths, has the third highest number of confirmed cases and second highest death toll from COVID in the world, behind onlythose of the United StatesandIndia. Africa The COVID pandemic was confirmed to have spread to Africa on February , with the first confirmed case announced inEgypt. The first confirmed case insub Saharan Africawas announced inNigeriaat the end of February . Within three months, the virus had spread throughout the continent Lesotho, the last African sovereign state to have remained free of the virus, reported its first case on May . By May, it appeared that most African countries were experiencing community transmission, although testing capacity was limited. Most of the identified imported cases arrived from Europe and the United States rather than from China where the virus originated. Many preventive measureswere implementedby different countries in Africa including travel restrictions, flight cancellations, and event cancellations. Despite fears, Africa reported lower death rates than other, more economically developed regions. In early June , Africa faced a third wave of COVID infections with cases rising in countries. By July the continent recorded more than , new COVID cases, a increase from the prior week and a increase from the January peak. More than sixteen African countries, includingMalawiandSenegal, recorded an uptick in new cases. The WHO labelled it Africa's 'Worst Pandemic Week Ever'. In October , WHO reported that most countries on the African continent will miss the goal of per cent vaccination by the end of . Oceania The COVID pandemic was confirmed to have reached Oceania on January , with the first confirmed case reported inMelbourne,Australia. It has since spread elsewhere in the region. AustraliaandNew Zealandwere praised for their handling of the pandemic in comparison to other Western nations, with New Zealand and each state in Australia wiping out all community transmission of the virus several times even after re introduction into the community. As a result of the high transmissibility of the Delta variant, however, by August , the Australian states ofNew South WalesandVictoriahad conceded defeat in their eradication efforts. In early October , New Zealand also abandoned its elimination strategy. In November and December, following vaccination efforts, the remaining states of Australia, excluding Western Australia, voluntarily gave upCOVID Zeroto open up state and international borders. The open borders allowed the Omicron variant of COVID to enter quickly, and cases subsequently exceeded , a day. By early March , with cases exceeding , a day, Western Australia conceded defeat in its eradication strategy and opened its borders. Despite record cases, Australian jurisdictions slowly removed restrictions such as close contact isolation, mask wearing, and density limits by April . On September , restrictions were significantly relaxed. The aircraft mask mandate was scrapped nationwide, and daily reporting transitioned to weekly reporting. On September, COVID disaster payment for isolating persons was extended for mandatory isolation. By September, all states had ended mask mandates on public transport, including in Victoria, where the mandate had lasted for approximately days. On September , all Australian leaders declared the emergency response finished and announced the end of isolation requirements. These changes were due in part to high levels of 'hybrid immunity' and low case numbers. Antarctica Due to its remoteness and sparse population,Antarcticawas the last continent to have confirmed cases of COVID . The first cases were reported in December , almost a year after the first cases of COVID were detected in China. At least people were infected in the first outbreak in , with several other outbreaks taking place in and . United Nations TheUnited Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNSC was criticised for its slow response, especially regarding the UN'sglobal ceasefire, which aimed to open up humanitarian access to conflict zones. The United Nations Security Council was criticised due to the inadequate manner in which it dealt with the COVID pandemic, namely the poor ability to create international collaboration during this crisis. On March , United Nations Secretary GeneralAnt nio Manuel de Oliveira Guterresappealed for a globalceasefire UN member states and observers signed a non binding supporting statement in June, and theUN Security Councilpassed aresolutionsupporting it in July. On September , Guterres urged theInternational Monetary Fundto help certain countries via debt relief and also call for countries to increase contributions to develop vaccines. WHO The WHO spearheaded initiatives such as theCOVID Solidarity Response Fundto raise money for the pandemic response, theUN COVID Supply Chain Task Force, and thesolidarity trialfor investigating potential treatment options for the disease. TheCOVAXprogramme, co led by the WHO,GAVI, and theCoalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations CEPI , aimed to accelerate the development, manufacture, and distribution of COVID vaccines, and to guarantee fair and equitable access across the world. Restrictions The pandemic shook the world's economy, with especially severe economic damage in the United States, Europe, and Latin America. A consensus report by American intelligence agencies in April concluded, Efforts to contain and manage the virus have reinforced nationalist trends globally, as some states turned inward to protect their citizens and sometimes cast blame on marginalised groups . COVID inflamed partisanship and polarisation around the world as bitter arguments exploded over how to respond. International trade was disrupted amid the formation of no entry enclaves. Travel restrictions The pandemic led many countries and regions to impose quarantines, entry bans, or other restrictions, either for citizens, recent travellers to affected areas, or for all travellers. Travel collapsed worldwide, damaging the travel sector. The effectiveness of travel restrictions was questioned as the virus spread across the world. One study found that travel restrictions only modestly affected the initial spread, unless combined with otherinfection prevention and controlmeasures. Researchers concluded that travel restrictions are most useful in the early and late phase of an epidemic and restrictions of travel from Wuhan unfortunately came too late . The European Union rejected the idea of suspending theSchengen free travel zone. Repatriation of foreign citizens Several countries repatriated their citizens and diplomatic staff from Wuhan and surrounding areas, primarily throughcharter flights. Canada, the United States, Japan, India, Sri Lanka, Australia, France, Argentina, Germany, and Thailand were among the first to do so. Brazil and New Zealand evacuated their own nationals and others. On March, South Africa repatriated South Africans who tested negative, while four who showed symptoms were left behind. Pakistan declined to evacuate its citizens. On February, the US announced it would evacuate Americans aboard theDiamond Princesscruise ship, and, on February, Canada evacuated Canadians from the ship. In early March, the Indian government began repatriating its citizens from Iran. On March, the United States began to withdraw some troops from Iraq. Impact Economics The pandemic and responses to it damaged the global economy. On February , worries about the outbreak crushed US stock indexes, which posted their sharpest falls since . Tourism collapsed due to travel restrictions, closing of public places including travel attractions, and advice of governments against travel. Airlines cancelled flights, while British regional airlineFlybecollapsed. The cruise line industry was hard hit, and train stations and ferry ports closed. International mail stopped or was delayed. The retail sector faced reductions in store hours or closures. Retailers in Europe and Latin America faced traffic declines of per cent. North America and Middle East retailers saw a per cent drop. Shopping centres faced a per cent drop in foot traffic in March compared to February. Mall operators around the world coped by increasing sanitation, installing thermal scanners to check the temperature of shoppers, and cancelling events. Hundreds of millions of jobs were lost, including more than million jobs in the US. According to a report byYelp, about of US businesses that closed will stay shut permanently. TheInternational Labour Organization ILO reported that the income generated in the first nine months of from work across the world dropped by . , or .trillion. Pandemic fears led topanic buying, emptying groceries of essentials such as food, toilet paper, and bottled water. Panic buying stemmed from perceived threat, perceived scarcity, fear of the unknown, coping behaviour, and social psychological factors e.g.social influenceand trust . Supplyshortageswere due to disruption to factory and logistic operations shortages were worsened bysupply chaindisruptions from factory and port shutdowns, and labour shortages. Shortages continued as managers underestimated the speed of economic recovery after the initial economic crash. The technology industry, in particular, warned of delays from underestimates ofsemiconductordemand for vehicles and other products. According to WHO Secretary General Tedros Ghebreyesus, demand forpersonal protective equipment PPE rose one hundredfold, pushing prices up twentyfold. PPE stocks were exhausted everywhere. In September , theWorld Bankreported that food prices remained generally stable and the supply outlook remained positive. However, the poorest countries witnessed a sharp increase in food prices, reaching the highest level since the pandemic began. The Agricultural Commodity Price Index stabilised in the third quarter but remained higher than in January . By contrast, petroleum products were in surplus at the beginning of the pandemic, as demand for gasoline and other products collapsed due to reduced commuting and other trips. The global energy crisiswas driven by a global surge in demand as the world economy recovered. Energy demand was particularly strong in Asia. In May , the US charged seven Chinese executives and four major container manufacturers, Singamas Container Holdings,China International Marine Containers, Shanghai Universal Logistics Equipment, and CXIC Group Containers, with conspiring to restrict shipping container production and fix prices from to , contributing to global supply chain disruptions and higher consumer costs during the pandemic. Arts and cultural heritage The performing arts andcultural heritage sectorswere profoundly affected by the pandemic. Both organisations' and individuals' operations have been impacted globally. By March , around the world and, to varying degrees, museums, libraries, performance venues, and other cultural institutions had been indefinitely closed with their exhibitions, events, and performances cancelled or postponed. A UNESCOreport estimated ten million job losses worldwide in the culture and creative industries. Some services continued through digital platforms, such as live streaming concerts or web based arts festivals. Politics The pandemic affected political systems, causing suspensions of legislative activities, isolations or deaths of politicians, and rescheduled elections. Although they developed broad support among epidemiologists, NPIs non pharmaceutical interventions were controversial in many countries. Intellectual opposition came primarily from other fields, along with heterodox epidemiologists. The pandemic and theresponse of Brazilian politiciansto it led to widespread panic, confusion, and pessimism in Brazil. When questioned regarding record deaths in the country in April , Brazilian presidentJair Bolsonarosaid So what? I'm sorry. What do you want me to do about it? Bolsonaro disregarded WHO recommended mitigation techniques and insteaddownplayed the risks of the virus, promoted increased economic activity, spreadmisinformationabout the efficacy of masks, vaccines, and public health measures, and distributed unproven treatments includinghydroxychloroquineandivermectin. A series offederal health ministersresigned or were dismissed after they refused to implement Bolsonaro's policies. Disagreements between federal and state governments led to a chaotic and delayed response to the rapid spread of the virus, exacerbated by preexisting social and economic disparities in the country. Employment, investment, and valuation of theBrazilian realplummeted to record lows. Brazil was also heavily affected by the Delta and Omicron variants. At the height of the outbreak in the spring of , , Brazilians were dying per day. Bolsonaro's loss toLula da Silvain the presidential electionis widely credited to the former'smishandling of the pandemic. Multiple provincial level administrators of theChinese Communist Party CCP were dismissed over their handling of quarantine measures. Some commentators claimed this move was intended to protect CCP General SecretaryXi Jinping. TheUS intelligence communityclaimed that China intentionally under reported its COVID caseload. The Chinese government maintained that it acted swiftly and transparently. Journalists and activists in China who reported on the pandemic were detained by authorities, includingZhang Zhan, who was arrested and tortured. In early March , the Italian government criticised the EU's lack of solidarity with Italy. On March , after a phone call with Italian Prime MinisterGiuseppe Conte, Russian presidentVladimir Putinordered theRussian armyto send military medics, disinfection vehicles, and other medical equipment to Italy. In early April, Norway and EU states like Romania and Austria started to offer help by sending medical personnel and disinfectant, andEuropean CommissionpresidentUrsula von der Leyenoffered an official apology to the country. Beginning in mid April , protestors objected to government imposed business closures and restrictions on personal movement and assembly. Simultaneously,essential workersprotested unsafe conditions and low wages by participating in a briefgeneral strike. Some political analysts claimed that the pandemic contributed to US PresidentDonald Trump'sdefeat to former Vice PresidentJoe Bidenand SenatorKamala Harris. TheCOVID pandemic in the United Statesprompted calls for the United States to adopt social policies common in other wealthy countries, includinguniversal health care,universal child care,paid sick leave, and higher levels of funding for public health. TheKaiser Family Foundationestimated that preventable hospitalisations of unvaccinated Americans in the second half of cost US .billion. There were also protest in regard to vaccine mandates in the United States. In January , the US Supreme Court struck down an OSHA rule that mandated vaccination or a testing regimen for all companies with greater than employees. The number of journalists imprisoned or detained increased worldwide some detentions were related to the pandemic. The plannedNATO Defender military exercise in Germany,Poland, and theBaltic states, the largest NATO war exercise since the end of theCold War, was held on a reduced scale. The Iranian government was heavily affected by the virus, which infected some two dozen parliament members and political figures. Iranian presidentHassan Rouhaniwrote a public letter to world leaders asking for help on March , due to a lack of access to international markets. Saudi Arabia, which had launched amilitary intervention in Yemenin March , declared a ceasefire. Diplomatic relations betweenJapan and South Koreaworsened. South Korea criticised Japan's ambiguous and passive quarantine efforts after Japan announced travellers from South Korea must quarantine for two weeks. South Korean society was initially polarised on presidentMoon Jae in's response to the crisis many Koreans signed petitions calling for Moon'simpeachmentor praising his response. Some countries passed emergency legislation. Some commentators expressed concern that it could allow governments to strengthen their grip on power. In Hungary, the parliament voted to allow Prime MinisterViktor Orb nto rule by decree indefinitely, suspend parliament and elections, and punish those deemed to have spread false information. In countries such asEgypt, Turkey, andThailand, opposition activists and government critics werearrestedfor allegedly spreadingfake news. InIndia, journalists criticising the government's response were arrested or issued warnings by police and authorities. Food systems The pandemic disrupted food systems worldwide, hitting at a time when hunger and undernourishment were rising an estimated million people lacked food security in . Food access fell driven by falling incomes, lost remittances, and disruptions to food production. In some cases, food prices rose. The pandemic and its accompanying lockdowns and travel restrictions slowed movement of food aid. According to the WHO, million people were undernourished in , likely related to the fallout of COVID . Education The pandemic impacted educational systems in many countries. Many governments temporarily closed educational institutions, often replaced byonline education. Other countries, such as Sweden, kept their schools open. As of September , approximately .billionlearnerswere affected due to school closures. School closures impacted students, teachers, and families with far reaching economic and societal consequences. They shed light on social and economic issues, includingstudent debt,digital learning, food insecurity, andhomelessness, as well as access tochildcare, health care, housing, internet, anddisability services. The impact was more severe for disadvantaged children. Many countries, including Bangladesh, granted auto promotion to the public examination candidates. The Higher Education Policy Institute reported that around of students claimed worsened mental health as a result of the pandemic. Health The pandemic impacted global health for many conditions. Hospital visits fell. Visits for heart attack symptoms declined by in the US and in Spain. The head of cardiology at theUniversity of Arizonasaid, My worry is some of these people are dying at home because they're too scared to go to the hospital . People with strokes andappendicitiswere less likely to seek treatment. Medical supply shortagesimpacted many people. The pandemic impactedmental health, increasinganxiety, depression, andpost traumatic stress disorder, affecting healthcare workers, patients, and quarantined individuals. In late , during the first northern hemisphere autumn and winter seasons following the widespread relaxation of global public health measures, North America and Europe experienced a surge in respiratory viruses and coinfections in both adults and children. This formed the beginning of the paediatric care crisis and what some experts termed a tripledemic of seasonal influenza,respiratory syncytial virus RSV , and SARS CoV throughout North America. In the United Kingdom, paediatric infections also began to spike beyond pre pandemic levels, albeit with different illnesses, such asGroup A streptococcal infectionand resultantscarlet fever. As of mid December , children in the UK had died due toStrep Aand the wave of infections had begun to spread into North America and Mainland Europe. The B Yamagata lineage ofinfluenza Bmight have become extinct in due to COVID pandemic measures. There have been no naturally occurring cases confirmed since March . In , the WHO concluded that protection against the Yamagata lineage was no longer necessary in the seasonalflu vaccine, reducing the number of lineages targeted by the vaccine from four to three. Preventative measures taken during the COVID pandemic may have impacted the number ofbronchiolitiscases, with observed decreases in cases during the pandemic followed by an increase when preventative measures were rolled back. Environment The pandemic and the reaction to it positively affected theenvironmentandclimateas a result of reduced human activity. During the anthropause , fossil fuel use decreased, resource consumption declined, and waste disposal improved, generating less pollution. Planned air traveland vehicle transportation declined. In China,lockdownsand other measures resulted in a decrease in coal consumption, and a reduction in nitrogen oxides emissions. In , a worldwide study on mammalian wildlife responses to human presence during COVID lockdowns found complex patterns of animal behaviour. Carnivores were generally less active when humans were around, while herbivores in developed areas were more active. Among other findings, this suggested that herbivores may view humans as a shield against predators, highlighting the importance of location and human presence history in understanding wildlife responses to changes in human activity in a given area. Awide varietyof largely mammalian species, both captive and wild, have been shown to be susceptible to SARS CoV , with some encountering a particularly high degree of fatal outcomes. In particular, bothfarmed and wild minkhave developed highly symptomatic and severe COVID infections, with a mortality rate as high as according to one study. White tailed deer, on the other hand, have largely avoided severe outcomes but have effectively becomenatural reservoirsof the virus, with large numbers of free ranging deer infected throughout the US and Canada, including approximately ofIowa's wild deer herd. An August study appeared to confirm the status of white tailed deer as a disease reservoir, noting that the viral evolution of SARS CoV in deer occurs at triple the rate of its evolution in humans and that infection rates remained high, even in areas rarely frequented by humans. Discrimination and prejudice Heightened prejudice,xenophobia, and racism toward people ofChinese and East Asian descentwere documented around the world. Reports from February , when most confirmed cases were confined to China, cited racist sentiments about Chinese people 'deserving' the virus. Individuals of Asian descent in Europe and North America reported increasing instances of racially motivated abuse and assaults as a result of the pandemic. US presidentDonald Trumpwas criticised for referring to SARS CoV as the Chinese Virus and Kung Flu , terms which were condemned as being racist and xenophobic. Age based discriminationagainst older adults increased during the pandemic. This was attributed to their perceived vulnerability and subsequent physical and social isolation measures, which, coupled with their reduced social activity, increased dependency on others. Similarly, limited digital literacy left the elderly more vulnerable to isolation, depression, and loneliness. In a correspondence published inThe Lancetin , German epidemiologist G nter Kampf described the harmful effects of inappropriate stigmatisation of unvaccinated people, who include our patients, colleagues, and other fellow citizens , noting the evidence that vaccinated individuals play a large role in transmission. American bioethicist Arthur Caplan responded to Kampf, writing Criticising the unvaccinated who... wind up in hospitals and morgues in huge numbers, put stress on finite resources, and prolong the pandemic... is not stigmatising, it is deserved moral condemnation . In January ,Amnesty InternationalurgedItalyto change their anti COVID restrictions to avoid discrimination against unvaccinated people, saying that the government must continue to ensure that the entire population can enjoy its fundamental rights . The restrictions included mandatory vaccination over the age of , and mandatory vaccination to use public transport. Lifestyle changes The pandemic triggered massive changes in behaviour, from increased Internet commerce to cultural changes in the workplace. Online retailers in the US posted .billion in sales in , an increase of . from .billion the year before. Home delivery orders increased, while indoor restaurant dining shut down due to lockdown orders or low sales. Hackers,cybercriminals, and scammers took advantage of the changes to launch new online attacks. Education in some countries temporarily shifted from physical attendance to video conferencing. Massive layoffs shrank the airline, travel, hospitality, and other industries. Despite most corporations implementing measures to address COVID in the workplace, a poll fromCatalystfound that as many as of employees around the world felt that these policies were only performative and not genuine . The pandemic led to a surge inremote work. According to aGallup poll, only of US employees were fully remote before the pandemic, compared to in May . Among white collar workers, that shift was more pronounced, with increasing to in the same period. That trend continued in later stages of the pandemic, with many workers choosing to remain remote even after workplaces reopened. Many Nordic, European, and Asian companies increased their recruitment of international remote workers even as the pandemic waned, partially to save on labour costs. This also led to a talent drain in the global south and in remote areas in the global north. High cost of living and dense urban areas also lost office real estate value due to remote worker exodus. By May , due to increasing layoffs and concerns over productivity, some white collar workplaces in the US had resorted to performance review penalties and indirect incentives e.g. donations to charity to encourage workers to return to the office. Historiography A study noted that the COVID pandemic had increased interest in epidemics and infectious diseases among both historians and the general public. Prior to the pandemic, these topics were usually overlooked by general history and only received attention in thehistory of medicine. Many comparisons were made between the COVID and influenza pandemics, including the development of anti mask movements, the widespread promotion of misinformation and the impact ofsocioeconomic disparities. Religion In some areas, religious groups exacerbated the spread of the virus, through large gatherings and the dissemination of misinformation. Some religious leaders decried what they saw as violations of religious freedom. In other cases, religious identity was a beneficial factor for health, increasing compliance with public health measures and protecting against the negative effects of isolation on mental wellbeing. Information dissemination Some news organisations removed their online paywalls for some or all of their pandemic related articles and posts. Many scientific publishers provided pandemic related journal articles to the public free of charge as part of the National Institutes of Health's COVID Public Health Emergency Initiative. According to one estimate from researchers at the University of Rome, . of COVID related papers were open access, compared to an average of . for the ten most deadly human diseases. The share of papers published on preprint servers prior to peer review increased dramatically. During the pandemic,Web GIStechnology was leveraged to provide up to date visualisations of data related to the pandemic with the public. Employing this technology, theJohns Hopkins UniversityCOVID dashboardserved as the first global visualisation of COVID data, which established it as the default method for government agencies to dissemeniate relevant spatial information. These dashboards were described by Jonathan Everts as the most striking cultural artefact of the current coronavirus SARS CoV pandemic , and during the pandemic every state government in the United States maintained one. Misinformation Misinformationandconspiracy theoriesabout the pandemic have been widespread they travel throughmass media,social mediaand text messaging. In March , WHO declared an infodemic of incorrect information. Cognitive biases, such asconfirmation bias, are linked to conspiracy beliefs, includingCOVID vaccine hesitancy. Culture and society The COVID pandemic had a major impact on popular culture. It was included in the narratives of ongoing pre pandemic television series and become a central narrative in new ones, with mixed results. Writing forThe New York Timesabout the then upcomingBBCsitcomPandemoniumon December ,David Segalasked, Are we ready to laugh about Covid ? Or rather, is there anything amusing, or recognizable in a humorous way, about life during a plague, with all of its indignities and setbacks, not to mention its rituals and rules . The pandemic had driven some people to seek peacefulescapismin media, while others were drawn toward fictional pandemics e.g.zombie apocalypses as an alternate form of escapism. Common themes have includedcontagion,isolationand loss ofcontrol. Many drew comparisons to the fictional filmContagion , praising its accuracies while noting some differences, such as the lack of an orderly vaccine rollout. As people turned to music to relieve emotions evoked by the pandemic,Spotifylistenership showed that classical,ambient, andchildren'sgenres grew, while pop,country, and dance remained relatively stable. Transition to later phases A March review declared a transition to endemic status to be inevitable . In June , an article inHuman Genomicssaid that the pandemic was still raging , but that now is the time to explore the transition from the pandemic to the endemic phase . Another review that month predicted that the virus that causes COVID would become the fifth endemic seasonal coronavirus, alongside four otherhuman coronaviruses. A February review of the fourcommon coldcoronaviruses concluded that the virus would become seasonal and, like the common cold, cause less severe disease for most people. Another review stated that the transition to endemic COVID may take years or decades. On May , the WHO declared that the pandemic was no longer apublic health emergency of international concern. This led several media outlets to incorrectly report that this meant the pandemic was over . The WHO commented toFull Factthat it was unlikely to declare the pandemic over in the near future and mentionedcholera, which it considers to have been apandemic since i.e., continuously for the last years . The WHO does not have an official category for pandemics or make declarations of when pandemics start or end. In June ,Hans Kluge, director of the WHO in Europe, commented that While the international public health emergency may have ended, the pandemic certainly has not . Epidemics and pandemics usually end when the disease becomesendemic, and when the disease becomes an accepted, manageable part of normal life in a given society . As of March , there was no widely agreed definition of when a disease is or is not a pandemic, though efforts at a formal definition were underway. Experts asked byTimethat month noted that COVID continued to circulate and cause disease, but expressed uncertainty as to whether it should still be described as a pandemic. In December ,Director General of the World Health OrganizationTedros Adhanom Ghebreyesusstated that COVID should not be referred to in past tense as it is still with us, still causes acute disease andLong COVIDand still kills... The world might want to forget about COVID , but we cannot afford to. By , five years after the start of the pandemic, experts asked byThe IndependentandThe Washington Postgenerally considered COVID to have become endemic. Cases and deaths from COVID still remained high in the United States, the only two infectious diseases causing more than , deaths a year were flu and COVID, according to an expert inThe Washington Post. Long term effects Economic Despite strong economic rebounds following the initial lockdowns in early , toward the latter phases of the pandemic, many countries began to experience long term economic effects. Several countries saw highinflation rateswhich had global impacts, particularly in developing countries. Some economic impacts such assupply chainand trade operations were seen as more permanent as the pandemic exposed major weaknesses in these systems. In Australia, the pandemic caused an increase inoccupational burnoutin . During the pandemic, a large percentage of workers in Canada came to prefer working from home, which had an impact on the traditional work model. Some corporations made efforts to force workers to return to work on site, while some embraced the idea. Travel There was a travel boom causing air travel to recover at rates faster than anticipated, and the aviation industry became profitable in for the first time since , before the pandemic. However, economic issues meant some predicted that the boom would begin to slow down. Business travel on airlines was still below pre pandemic levels and is predicted not to recover. Health An increase in excess deaths from underlying causes not related to COVID has been largely blamed on systematic issues causing delays in health care and screening during the pandemic, which has resulted in an increase of non COVID related deaths. Immunisations During the pandemic, millions of children missed out on vaccinations as countries focused efforts on combating COVID . Efforts were made to increase vaccination rates among children inlow income countries. These efforts were successful in increasing vaccination rates for some diseases, though the UN noted that post pandemicmeasles vaccinationswere still falling behind. Some of the decrease in immunisation was driven by an increase in mistrust of public health officials. This was seen in both low income and high income countries. SeveralAfrican countriessaw a decline in vaccinations due to misinformation around the pandemic flowing into other areas. Immunisation rates have yet to recover in the United States and the United Kingdom. See also Notes References Further reading External links Health agencies Data and graphs Medical journals DOMAIN SCIENCE Anexoplanetorextrasolar planetis aplanetoutside theSolar System. The first confirmed detection of an exoplanet was in around apulsar, and the first detection around amain sequence starwas in . A different planet, first detected in , was confirmed in . In , it was recognized that the first possible evidence of an exoplanet had been noted in , aprecovery.As of July , there are , confirmed exoplanets in ,planetary systems, with , systemshaving more than one planet. There are manymethods of detecting exoplanets.Transit photometryandDoppler spectroscopyhave found the most, but these methods suffer from a clear observational bias favoring the detection of large planets close to the star. About in Sun like stars a are estimated to have an Earth sized b planet in thehabitable zone. c Assuming there are billion stars in theMilky Way, d it can be hypothesized that there are billion potentially habitable Earth sized planets in the Milky Way, rising to billion if planets orbiting the numerousred dwarfsare included. Theleast massive exoplanetknown isDraugr, which is about twice the mass of theMoon. The most massive exoplanet listed on theNASA Exoplanet ArchiveisHR b, about times the mass ofJupiter. However, according to some definitions of a planet based on the nuclear fusion ofdeuterium , it is too massive to be a planet and might be abrown dwarf. Known orbital times for exoplanets vary fromless than an hour for those closest to their star to thousands of years. Some exoplanets are so far away from the star that it is difficult to tell whether they are gravitationally bound to it. Thenearest exoplanetsare located .light years .parsecs from Earth and orbitProxima Centauri, the closest star to the Sun. At the other extreme, there is evidence forextragalactic planets exoplanets located in other galaxies. The discovery of exoplanets has intensified interest in the search forextraterrestrial life. There is special interest in planets that orbit in a star'shabitable zone sometimes called goldilocks zone , where it is possible for liquid water, a prerequisite forlifeas we know it, to exist on the surface. However, the study ofplanetary habitabilityalso considers a wide range of other factors in determining the suitability of a planet for hosting life. In collaboration with ground based and other space based observatories, theJames Webb Space Telescope JWST is expected to give more insight into exoplanet traits, such as theircomposition,environmental conditions, and habitability. Rogue planetsare those that are not in planetary systems. Such objects are generally considered in a separate category from planets, especially if they aregas giants, often counted assub brown dwarfs. The number of rogue planets in the Milky Way is possibly in the billions. Definition IAU The officialdefinition of the termplanetused by theInternational Astronomical Union IAU only covers theSolar Systemand thus does not apply to exoplanets. The IAU Working Group on Extrasolar Planets issued a position statement containing a working definition of planet in and which was modified in . Anexoplanetwas defined by the following criteria This working definition was amended by the IAU's Commission F Exoplanets and the Solar System in August . The official working definition of anexoplanetis now as follows Alternatives The IAU's working definition is not always used. One alternate suggestion is that planets should be distinguished frombrown dwarfson the basis of their formation. It is widely thought that giant planets form through coreaccretion, which may sometimes produce planets with masses above the deuterium fusion threshold massive planets of that sort may have already been observed. Brown dwarfs form like stars from the direct gravitational collapse of clouds of gas, and this formation mechanism also produces objects that are below theMJuplimit and can be as low asMJup. Objects in this mass range that orbit their stars with wide separations of hundreds or thousands ofastronomical units AU and have large star object mass ratios likely formed as brown dwarfs their atmospheres would likely have a composition more similar to their host star than accretion formed planets, which would contain increased abundances of heavier elements. Most directly imaged planets as of April are massive and have wide orbits so probably represent the low mass end of a brown dwarf formation. One study suggests that objects aboveMJupformed through gravitational instability and should not be thought of as planets. Also, the Jupiter mass cutoff does not have a precise physical significance. Deuterium fusion can occur in some objects with a mass below that cutoff. The amount of deuterium fused depends to some extent on the composition of the object. In , theExtrasolar Planets Encyclopaediaincluded objects up to Jupiter masses, saying, The fact that there is no special feature aroundMJupin the observed mass spectrum reinforces the choice to forget this mass limit . As of , this limit was increased to Jupiter masses based on a study of mass density relationships. TheExoplanet Data Explorerincludes objects up to Jupiter masses with the advisory The Jupiter mass distinction by the IAU Working Group is physically unmotivated for planets with rocky cores, and observationally problematic due to the sin i ambiguity. TheNASA Exoplanet Archiveincludes objects with a mass or minimum mass equal to or less than Jupiter masses. Another criterion for separating planets and brown dwarfs, rather than deuterium fusion, formation process or location, is whether the corepressureis dominated byCoulomb pressureorelectron degeneracy pressurewith the dividing line at around Jupiter masses. Confirmation An exoplanet is confirmed for NASA's Exoplanet Archive either when different observation techniques reveal features that can only be explained by a planet or by analytical techniques. For the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopedia, A planet is considered as Confirmed if it is claimed unambiguously in an accepted paper or a professional conference. Nomenclature The convention for naming exoplanets is an extension of the system used for designating multiple star systems as adopted by theInternational Astronomical Union IAU . For exoplanets orbiting a single star, the IAU designation is formed by taking the designated or proper name of its parent star, and adding a lower case letter. Letters are given in order of each planet's discovery around the parent star, so that the first planet discovered in a system is designated b the parent star is considered a and later planets are given subsequent letters. If several planets in the same system are discovered at the same time, the closest one to the star gets the next letter, followed by the other planets in order of orbital size. A provisional IAU sanctioned standard exists to accommodate the designation ofcircumbinary planets. A limited number of exoplanets haveIAU sanctioned proper names. Other naming systems exist. citation needed History of detection For centuries scientists, philosophers, and science fiction writers suspected that extrasolar planets existed, but there was no way of knowing whether they were real in fact, how common they were, or how similar they might be to the planets of theSolar System. Various detection claims made in the nineteenth century were rejected by astronomers. citation needed The first evidence of a possible exoplanet, orbitingVan Maanen , was recorded in , but was not recognized as such until . The astronomerWalter Sydney Adamsproduced a spectrum of the star usingMount Wilson's inch telescopewhich he interpreted the spectrum to be of anF type main sequence star. This spectrum was reexamined during studies ofwhite dwarfstars with unpredicted compositions. It is now thought that such a spectrum could be caused by the residue of a nearby exoplanet that had been pulverized by the gravity of the star, the resulting dust then falling onto the star. Numerous other claims of discovery took place in the mid th century, involving Cygni, Lalande , and Barnard's Star, which were not discredited until the mid to late s see Discredited claims below . Anothersuspected scientific detectionof an exoplanet occurred in . Shortly afterwards, the first detection that is currently accepted came in whenAleksander WolszczanandDale Frailannounced the discovery of two terrestrial mass planets orbiting themillisecond pulsarPSR B . The first confirmation of an exoplanet orbiting amain sequencestar was made in , when a giant planet was found in a four day orbit around the nearby star Pegasi. Some exoplanets have beenimaged directlyby telescopes, but the vast majority have been detected through indirect methods, such as thetransit methodand theradial velocity method. In February , researchers using theChandra X ray Observatory, combined with a planet detection technique calledmicrolensing, found evidence of planets in a distant galaxy, stating, Some of these exoplanets are as relatively small as the moon, while others are as massive as Jupiter. Unlike Earth, most of the exoplanets are not tightly bound to stars, so they're actually wandering through space or loosely orbiting between stars. We can estimate that the number of planets in this faraway galaxy is more than a trillion. Early speculations This space we declare to be infinite... In it are an infinity of worlds of the same kind as our own. Giordano Bruno In the th century, the Italian philosopherGiordano Bruno, an early supporter of theCopernicantheory that Earth and other planets orbit the Sun heliocentrism , put forward the view that fixed stars are similar to the Sun and are likewise accompanied by planets. In the th century, the same possibility was mentioned byIsaac Newtonin the General Scholium that concludes hisPrincipia. Making a comparison to the Sun's planets, he wrote And if the fixed stars are the centres of similar systems, they will all be constructed according to a similar design and subject to the dominion ofOne. In , D.Belorizky demonstrated that it was realistic to search for exo Jupiters by usingtransit photometry. In , more than years before the firsthot Jupiterwas discovered,Otto Struvewrote that there is no compelling reason that planets could not be much closer to their parent star than is the case in the Solar System, and proposed thatDoppler spectroscopyand thetransit methodcould detectsuper Jupitersin short orbits. Discredited claims Claims of exoplanet detections have been made since the nineteenth century. Some of the earliest involve thebinary star Ophiuchi. In ,William Stephen Jacobat theEast India Company'sMadras Observatoryreported that orbital anomalies made it highly probable that there was a planetary body in this system. In the s,Thomas J. J. Seeof theUniversity of Chicagoand theUnited States Naval Observatorystated that the orbital anomalies proved the existence of a dark body in the Ophiuchi system with a yearperiodaround one of the stars. However,Forest Ray Moultonpublished a paper proving that a three body system with those orbital parameters would be highly unstable. Multiple claims have been made that Cygnimight have a planetary system.Kaj Strandof the Sproul Observatory in observed tiny but systematic variations in the orbital motions of Cygni A and B, suggesting that a third body of about Jupiter masses must be orbiting Cygni A. Multiple further claims were made, but more recent observations have yet to find confirmation. More information at Cygni Claims of a planetary system. Around the same time that Cygni was being investigated, similar claims about the presence of exoplanets were made aboutLalande Lalande Past claims of planets. During the s and s,Peter van de KampofSwarthmore Collegemade another prominent series of detection claims, this time for planets orbitingBarnard's Star. Astronomers now generally regard all early reports of detection as erroneous. In ,Andrew Lyne,M. Bailesand S. L. Shemar claimed to have discovered apulsar planetin orbit aroundPSR , usingpulsar timingvariations. The claim briefly received intense attention, but Lyne and his team soon retracted it. Confirmed discoveries As of April , a total of,confirmed exoplanets are listed in theNASA Exoplanet Archive, including a few that were confirmations of controversial claims from the late s. The first published discovery to receive subsequent confirmation was made in by the Canadian astronomers Bruce Campbell, G. A. H. Walker, and Stephenson Yang of theUniversity of Victoriaand theUniversity of British Columbia. Although they were cautious about claiming a planetary detection, their radial velocity observations suggested that a planet orbits the starGamma Cephei. Partly because the observations were at the very limits of instrumental capabilities at the time, astronomers remained skeptical for several years about this and other similar observations. It was thought some of the apparent planets might instead have beenbrown dwarfs, objects intermediate in mass between planets and stars. In , additional observations were published that supported the existence of the planet orbiting Gamma Cephei, but subsequent work in again raised serious doubts. Finally, in , improved techniques allowed the planet's existence to be confirmed. On January , radio astronomersAleksander WolszczanandDale Frailannounced the discovery of two planets orbiting themillisecond pulsarPSR based on the variability of timing of the pulses. This discovery was confirmed, and is generally considered to be the first definitive detection of exoplanets. Follow up observations solidified these results, and confirmation of a third planet in revived the topic in the popular press. These pulsar planets are thought to have formed from the unusual remnants of thesupernovathat produced the pulsar, in a second round of planet formation, or else to be theremaining rocky coresofgas giantsthat somehow survived the supernova and then decayed into their current orbits. As pulsars are aggressive stars, it was considered unlikely at the time that a planet could form in their orbit. In the early s, a group of astronomers led byDonald Backer, who were studying what they thought was a binary pulsar PSR B b , determined that a third object was needed to explain the observedDoppler shifts. Within a few years, the gravitational effects of the planet on the orbit of the pulsar andwhite dwarfhad been measured, giving an estimate of the mass of the third object that was too small to be a star. The conclusion that the third object was a planet was announced byStephen Thorsettand his collaborators in . On October ,Michel MayorandDidier Quelozof theUniversity of Genevaannounced the first definitive detection ofan exoplanetorbiting amain sequencestar, nearbyG type star Pegasi. This discovery, made at theObservatoire de Haute Provence, ushered in the modern era of exoplanetary discovery, and was recognized by a share of the Nobel Prize in Physics. Technological advances, most notably in high resolutionspectroscopy, led to the rapid detection of many new exoplanets astronomers could detect exoplanets indirectly by measuring theirgravitationalinfluence on the motion of their host stars. More extrasolar planets were later detected by observing the variation in a star's apparent luminosity as an orbiting planet transited in front of it. Initially, most known exoplanets were massive planets that orbited very close to their parent stars. Astronomers were surprised by these hot Jupiters , because theories ofplanetary formationhad indicated that giant planets should only form at large distances from stars. But eventually more planets of other sorts were found, and it is now clear that hot Jupiters make up a minority of exoplanets. In ,Upsilon Andromedaebecame the first main sequence star known to have multiple planets. Kepler contains the first discovered planet that orbits a binary main sequence star system. On February , NASA announced the discovery of newly verified exoplanets around stars by theKeplerSpace Telescope. These exoplanets were checked using a statistical technique called verification by multiplicity . Before these results, most confirmed planets were gas giants comparable in size to Jupiter or larger because they were more easily detected, but theKeplerplanets are mostly between the size of Neptune and the size of Earth. On July , NASA announcedKepler b, a near Earth size planet orbiting the habitable zone of a G type star. On September , NASA discovered an exoplanet about light years away from Earth in the constellation Virgo. This exoplanet, Wolf b, is twice the size of Earth and was discovered orbiting a type of star known as an Orange Dwarf . Wolf b completes one orbit in as few as six days because it is very close to the star. Wolf b is the only exoplanet that large that can be found near the so calledsmall planet radius gap. The gap, sometimes called the Fulton gap, is the observation that it is unusual to find exoplanets with sizes between . and times the radius of the Earth. Candidate discoveries As of January , NASA'sKeplerandTESSmissions had identified planetary candidates yet to be confirmed, several of them being nearly Earth sized and located in the habitable zone, some around Sun like stars. In September , astronomers reported evidence, for the first time, of anextragalactic planet,M ULS b, detected by eclipsing a brightX ray source XRS , in theWhirlpool Galaxy Ma . Detection methods Direct imaging Planets are extremely faint compared to their parent stars. For example, a Sun like star is about a billion times brighter than the reflected light from any exoplanet orbiting it. It is difficult to detect such a faint light source, and furthermore, the parent star causes a glare that tends to wash it out. It is necessary to block the light from the parent star to reduce the glare while leaving the light from the planet detectable doing so is a major technical challenge which requires extremeoptothermal stability. Almost all exoplanets that have been directly imaged are both large more massive thanJupiter and widely separated from their parent stars. Specially designed direct imaging instruments such asGemini Planet Imager,VLT SPHERE, andSCExAOwill image dozens of gas giants, but the vast majority of known extrasolar planets have only been detected through indirect methods. Indirect methods Formation and evolution Planets may form within a few to tens or more of millions of years of their star forming. The planets of theSolar Systemcan only be observed in their current state, but observations of different planetary systems of varying ages allows us to observe planets at different stages of evolution. Available observations range from youngprotoplanetary diskswhere planets are still forming to planetary systems of over Gyr old. When planets form in a gaseous protoplanetary disk, they accretehydrogen heliumenvelopes. These envelopes cool and contract over time and, depending on the mass of the planet, some or all of the hydrogen helium is eventually lost to space. This means that even terrestrial planets may start off with large radii if they form early enough. An example isKepler bwhich has only about twice the mass of Earth but is almost the size of Saturn, which is a hundred times the mass of Earth. Kepler b is quite young at a few hundred million years old. Planet hosting stars There is at least one planet on average per star. About in Sun like stars a have an Earth sized b planet in thehabitable zone. Most known exoplanets orbit stars roughly similar to theSun, i.e.main sequence starsofspectral categoriesF, G, or K. Lower mass stars red dwarfs, of spectral category M are less likely to have planets massive enough to be detected by theradial velocity method. Despite this, several tens of planets around red dwarfs have been discovered by theKepler space telescope, which uses thetransit methodto detect smaller planets. Using data fromKepler, a correlation has been found between themetallicityof a star and the probability that the star hosts a giant planet, similar to the size ofJupiter. Stars with higher metallicity are more likely to have planets, especially giant planets, than stars with lower metallicity. Some planets orbit one member of abinary starsystem, and severalcircumbinary planetshave been discovered which orbit both members of a binary star. A few planets intriple starsystems are known and one in the quadruple systemKepler . Orbital and physical parameters General features Color and brightness The apparent brightness apparent magnitude of a planet depends on how far away the observer is, how reflective the planet is albedo , and how much light the planet receives from its star, which depends on how far the planet is from the star and how bright the star is. So, a planet with a low albedo that is close to its star can appear brighter than a planet with a high albedo that is far from the star. In , the color of an exoplanet was determined for the first time. The best fitalbedomeasurements ofHD bsuggest that it is deep dark blue. Later that same year, the colors of several other exoplanets were determined, includingGJ bwhich visually has a magenta color, andKappa Andromedae b, which if seen up close would appear reddish in color. Helium planetsare expected to be white or grey in appearance. The darkest known planet in terms ofgeometric albedoisTrES b, ahot Jupiterthat reflects less than of the light from its star, making it less reflective than coal or black acrylic paint. Hot Jupiters are expected to be quite dark due to sodium and potassium in their atmospheres, but it is not known why TrES b is so dark it could be due to an unknown chemical compound. Forgas giants, geometric albedo generally decreases with increasing metallicity or atmospheric temperature unless there are clouds to modify this effect. Increased cloud column depth increases the albedo at optical wavelengths, but decreases it at some infrared wavelengths. Optical albedo increases with age, because older planets have higher cloud column depths. Optical albedo decreases with increasing mass, because higher mass giant planets have higher surface gravities, which produces lower cloud column depths. Also, elliptical orbits can cause major fluctuations in atmospheric composition, which can have a significant effect. There is more thermal emission than reflection at some near infrared wavelengths for massive and or young gas giants. So, although optical brightness is fullyphase dependent, this is not always the case in the near infrared. Temperatures of gas giants reduce over time and with distance from their stars. Lowering the temperature increases optical albedo even without clouds. At a sufficiently low temperature, water clouds form, which further increase optical albedo. At even lower temperatures, ammonia clouds form, resulting in the highest albedos at most optical and near infrared wavelengths. Magnetic field In , a magnetic field aroundHD bwas inferred from the wayhydrogenwas evaporating from the planet. It is the first indirect detection of a magnetic field on an exoplanet. The magnetic field is estimated to be about one tenth as strong as Jupiter's. The magnetic fields of exoplanets are thought to be detectable by theirauroralradioemissions with sensitive low frequency radio telescopes such asLOFAR, although they have yet to be found. The radio emissions could measure the rotation rate of the interior of an exoplanet, and may yield a more accurate way to measure exoplanet rotation than by examining the motion ofclouds. However, the most sensitive radio search forauroralemissions, thus far, from nine exoplanets with Arecibo also did not result in any discoveries. Earth's magnetic fieldresults from its flowing liquid metallic core, but on massive super Earths with high pressure, different compounds may form which do not match those created under terrestrial conditions. Compounds may form with greater viscosities and high melting temperatures, which could prevent the interiors from separating into different layers and so result in undifferentiated coreless mantles. Forms of magnesium oxide such asMgSiOcould be a liquid metal at the pressures and temperatures found in super Earths and could generate a magnetic field in the mantles of super Earths. Hot Jupitershave been observed to have a larger radius than expected. This could be caused by the interaction between thestellar windand the planet'smagnetospherecreating an electric current through the planet that heats it up Joule heating causing it to expand. The more magnetically active a star is, the greater the stellar wind and the larger the electric current leading to more heating and expansion of the planet. This theory matches the observation that stellar activity is correlated with inflated planetary radii. In August , scientists announced the transformation of gaseousdeuteriuminto a liquidmetallic hydrogenform. This may help researchers better understandgiant gas planets, such asJupiter,Saturnand related exoplanets, since such planets are thought to contain a lot of liquid metallic hydrogen, which may be responsible for their observed powerfulmagnetic fields. Although scientists previously announced that the magnetic fields of close in exoplanets may cause increasedstellar flaresand starspots on their host stars, in this claim was demonstrated to be false in theHD system. The failure to detect star planet interactions in the well studied HD system calls other related claims of the effect into question. A later search for radio emissions from eight exoplanets that orbit within .astronomical unitsof their host stars, conducted by theArecibo radio telescopealso failed to find signs of these magnetic star planet interactions. In , the strength of the surface magnetic fields of hot Jupiterswere estimated and ranged between and gausscompared to Jupiter's surface magnetic field of . gauss. In astronomers detected what might be the first sign of magnetosphere around arockyexoplanet in theYZ Cetisystem. Plate tectonics In , two independent teams of researchers came to opposing conclusions about the likelihood ofplate tectonicson largersuper Earths with one team saying that plate tectonics would be episodic or stagnant and the other team saying that plate tectonics is very likely on super Earths even if the planet is dry. If super Earths have more than times as much water as Earth, then they becomeocean planetswith all land completely submerged. However, if there is less water than this limit, then the deep water cycle would move enough water between the oceans and mantle to allow continents to exist. Volcanism Large surface temperature variations on Cancri ehave been attributed to possible volcanic activity releasing large clouds of dust which blanket the planet and block thermal emissions. Tidal heating caused bygravitationaltug of neighboring planets might lead to the emergence of volcanic activities on a terrestrial exoplanet. Rings In , the starV Centauriwas occulted by an object either a planet or brown dwarf surrounded by an extensive disc of debris. The object, designatedJb, was long believed to host a vast planetaryring systemmuch larger thanSaturn's rings. Follow up observations found the supposed ring system could instead be a circumplanetary disk. There is strong evidence of a ring system aroundHIP f, given the planet's measured radius is too large for its mass, the radius measurement might have been affected by a ring system around the planet. The rings of the Solar System's gas giants are aligned with their planet's equator. However, for exoplanets that orbit close to their star, tidal forces from the star would lead to the outermost rings of a planet being aligned with the planet's orbital plane around the star. A planet's innermost rings would still be aligned with the planet's equator so that if the planet has atilted rotational axis, then the different alignments between the inner and outer rings would create a warped ring system. Moons There is evidence that moons around other planets, commonly referred to as exomoons, may exist, but none has been confirmed so far. In a candidate exomoon was detected around WASP b via periodic light variations in the planet'slight curve. Subsequent observations found this object might actually be atrojan planet. In December , a candidate exomoon was detected in the microlensing eventMOA BLG , it was believed to be either a.M exomoon around a Jupiter sized free floating planet or a Neptune mass planet around a red dwarf, but follow up observations confirmed the latter scenario. On October , evidence suggesting a large exomoon orbitingKepler bwas reported, and in evidence of an exomoon around Kepler b was also reported. Their existence, however, remain doubtful, but follow up observations may confirm these exomoons. The detection ofsodiumin hot Jupiters such asWASP b,HD borWASP bis likely due to aIo like exomoon around these planets. Atmospheres Atmospheres have been detected around several exoplanets. The first to be observed wasHD bin . As of February , more than fiftytransitingand fivedirectly imagedexoplanet atmospheres have been observed, resulting in detection of molecular spectral features observation of day night temperature gradients and constraints on vertical atmospheric structure. Also, an atmosphere has been detected on the non transiting hot JupiterTau Bo tis b. In May , glints of light fromEarth, seen as twinkling from an orbiting satellite a million miles away, were found to bereflected lightfromice crystalsin theatmosphere. The technology used to determine this may be useful in studying the atmospheres of distant worlds, including those of exoplanets. citation needed Kepler bis a small rocky planet, very close to its star, that is evaporating and leaving a trailing tail of cloud and dust like acomet. The dust could be ash erupting from volcanos and escaping due to the small planet's low surface gravity, or it could be from metals that are vaporized by the high temperatures of being so close to the star with the metal vapor then condensing into dust. In June , scientists reported that the atmosphere ofGJ bwas evaporating, resulting in a giant cloud around the planet and, due to radiation from the host star, a long trailing tailmillionkm millionmi long. Insolation pattern Tidally lockedplanets in a spin orbit resonancewould have their star always shining directly overhead on one spot, which would be hot with the opposite hemisphere receiving no light and being freezing cold. Such a planet could resemble an eyeball, with the hotspot being the pupil. Planets with aneccentric orbitcould be locked in other resonances. and resonances would result in a double eyeball pattern with hotspots in both eastern and western hemispheres. Planets with both an eccentric orbit and atilted axis of rotationwould have more complicated insolation patterns. Surface Surface composition Surface features can be distinguished from atmospheric features by comparing emission and reflection spectroscopy withtransmission spectroscopy. Mid infrared spectroscopy of exoplanets may detect rocky surfaces, and near infrared may identify magma oceans or high temperature lavas, hydrated silicate surfaces and water ice, giving an unambiguous method to distinguish between rocky and gaseous exoplanets. Surface temperature Measuring the intensity of the light it receives from its parent star can estimate the temperature of an exoplanet. For example, the planetOGLE BLG Lbis estimated to have a surface temperature of roughly C K . However, such estimates may be substantially in error because they depend on the planet's usually unknownalbedo, and because factors such as thegreenhouse effectmay introduce unknown complications. A few planets have had their temperature measured by observing the variation in infrared radiation as the planet moves around in its orbit and is eclipsed by its parent star. For example, the planetHD bhas been estimated to have an average temperature of , K C on its dayside and K C on its nightside. Habitability As more planets are discovered, the field ofexoplanetologycontinues to grow into a deeper study of extrasolar worlds, and will ultimately tackle the prospect oflife on planetsbeyond theSolar System. At cosmic distances,lifecan only be detected if it is developed at a planetary scale and strongly modified the planetary environment, in such a way that the modifications cannot be explained by classical physico chemical processes out of equilibrium processes . For example, molecular oxygen O in theatmosphere of Earthis a result ofphotosynthesisby living plants and many kinds of microorganisms, so it can be used as anindication of lifeon exoplanets, although small amounts of oxygen could also be produced by non biological means. Ifwater is a requirement for life, a habitable planet must sustain water. It must orbit a stablestarat a distance within whichplanetary mass objectswith sufficientatmospheric pressurecan supportliquid waterat their surfaces. Habitable zone The habitable zone around a star is the region where the temperature is just right to allow liquid water to exist on the surface of a planet under a suitable atmosphere that is, not too close to the star for the water to evaporate and not too far away from the star for the water to freeze. The heat produced by stars varies depending on the size and age of the star, so that the habitable zone can be at different distances for different stars. Also, the atmospheric conditions on the planet influence the planet's ability to retain heat so that the location of the habitable zone is also specific to each type of planet desert planets also known as dry planets , with very little water, will have less water vapor in the atmosphere than Earth and so have a reduced greenhouse effect, meaning that a desert planet could maintain oases of water closer to its star than Earth is to the Sun. The lack of water also means there is less ice to reflect heat into space, so the outer edge of desert planet habitable zones is further out. Rocky planets with a thick hydrogen atmosphere could maintain surface water much further out than the Earth Sun distance. Planets with larger mass have wider habitable zones because gravity reduces the water cloud column depth which reduces the greenhouse effect of water vapor, thus moving the inner edge of the habitable zone closer to the star. Planetaryrotation rateis one of the major factors determining thecirculation of the atmosphereand hence the pattern of clouds slowly rotating planets create thick clouds thatreflectmore and so can be habitable much closer to their star. Earth with its current atmosphere would be habitable in Venus's orbit, if it had Venus's slow rotation. If Venus lost its water ocean due to arunaway greenhouse effect, it is likely to have had a higher rotation rate in the past. Alternatively, Venus never had an ocean because water vapor was lost to space during its formation and could have had its slow rotation throughout its history. Tidally locked planets a.k.a. eyeball planets can be habitable closer to their star than previously thought due to the effect of clouds at high stellar flux, strong convection produces thick water clouds near the substellar point that greatly increase the planetary albedo and reduce surface temperatures. Planets in the habitable zones of stars withlow metallicityare more habitable for complex life on land than high metallicity stars because the stellar spectrum of high metallicity stars is less likely to cause the formation of ozone thus enabling more ultraviolet rays to reach the planet's surface. Habitable zones have usually been defined in terms of surface temperature, however over half of Earth's biomass is from subsurface microbes, and the temperature increases with depth, so the subsurface can be conducive for microbial life when the surface is frozen and if this is considered, the habitable zone extends much further from the star, evenrogue planetscould have liquid water at sufficient depths underground. In an earlier era of theuniversethe temperature of thecosmic microwave backgroundwould have allowed any rocky planets that existed to have liquid water on their surface regardless of their distance from a star. Jupiter like planets might not be habitable, but they could havehabitable moons. Ice ages and snowball states The outer edge of the habitable zone is where planets are completely frozen, but planets well inside the habitable zone can periodically become frozen. If orbital fluctuations or other causes produce cooling, then this creates more ice, but ice reflects sunlight causing even more cooling, creating a feedback loop until the planet is completely or nearly completely frozen. When the surface is frozen, this stopscarbon dioxide weathering, resulting in a build up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from volcanic emissions. This creates agreenhouse effectwhich thaws the planet again. Planets with a largeaxial tilt are less likely to enter snowball states and can retain liquid water further from their star. Large fluctuations of axial tilt can have even more of a warming effect than a fixed large tilt. Counterintuitively, planets orbiting cooler stars, such as red dwarfs, are less likely to enter snowball states because the infrared radiation emitted by cooler stars is mostly at longer wavelengths that are absorbed by ice, which heats it up. Tidal heating If a planet has an eccentric orbit, thentidal heatingcan provide another source of energy besides stellar radiation. This means that eccentric planets in the radiative habitable zone can be too hot for liquid water. Tides alsocircularizeorbits over time, so there could be planets in the habitable zone with circular orbits that have no water because they used to have eccentric orbits. Eccentric planets further out than the habitable zone would still have frozen surfaces, but the tidal heating could create a subsurface ocean similar toEuropa's. In some planetary systems, such as in theUpsilon Andromedaesystem, the eccentricity of orbits is maintained or even periodically varied by perturbations from other planets in the system. Tidal heating can cause outgassing from the mantle, contributing to the formation and replenishment of an atmosphere. Potentially habitable planets A review in identified exoplanetsKepler f,Kepler fandKepler bas the best candidates for being potentially habitable. These are at a distance of , and ,light yearsaway, respectively. Of these, Kepler f is in similar size to Earth with its . Earth radius measure, and it is located towards the outer edge of the habitable zone around itsred dwarfstar. When looking at the nearest terrestrial exoplanet candidates,Proxima Centauri bis about . light years away. Its equilibrium temperature is estimated to be C K . numberradius earth radii r this returns an object with anext method ornext in Python . This is the step most people forget to tell you about Uses the iterator to loop over items Keep calling thenext method on the iterator returned from step . The return value fromnext is assigned toxand the loop body is executed. If an exceptionStopIterationis raised from withinnext , it means there are no more values in the iterator and the loop is exited. The truth is Python performs the above two steps anytime it wants toloop overthe contents of an object so it could be a for loop, but it could also be code likeotherlist.extend mylist whereotherlistis a Python list . Heremylistis aniterablebecause it implements the iterator protocol. In a user defined class, you can implement theiter method to make instances of your class iterable. This method should return aniterator. An iterator is an object with anext method. It is possible to implement bothiter andnext on the same class, and haveiter returnself. This will work for simple cases, but not when you want two iterators looping over the same object at the same time. So that's the iterator protocol, many objects implement this protocol Note that aforloop doesn't know what kind of object it's dealing with it just follows the iterator protocol, and is happy to get item after item as it callsnext . Built in lists return their items one by one, dictionaries return thekeysone by one, files return thelinesone by one, etc. And generators return... well that's whereyieldcomes in Instead ofyieldstatements, if you had threereturnstatements inf only the first would get executed, and the function would exit. Butf is no ordinary function. Whenf is called, itdoes notreturn any of the values in the yield statements! It returns a generator object. Also, the function does not really exit it goes into a suspended state. When theforloop tries to loop over the generator object, the function resumes from its suspended state at the very next line after theyieldit previously returned from, executes the next line of code, in this case, ayieldstatement, and returns that as the next item. This happens until the function exits, at which point the generator raisesStopIteration, and the loop exits. So the generator object is sort of like an adapter at one end it exhibits the iterator protocol, by exposingiter andnext methods to keep theforloop happy. At the other end, however, it runs the function just enough to get the next value out of it and puts it back in suspended mode. Why use generators? Usually, you can write code that doesn't use generators but implements the same logic. One option is to use the temporary list 'trick' I mentioned before. That will not work in all cases, for e.g. if you have infinite loops, or it may make inefficient use of memory when you have a really long list. The other approach is to implement a new iterable classSomethingIterthat keeps the state in instance members and performs the next logical step in itsnext ornext in Python method. Depending on the logic, the code inside thenext method may end up looking very complex and prone to bugs. Here generators provide a clean and easy solution. Comments Add a comment Think of it this way An iterator is just a fancy sounding term for an object that has anext method. So a yield ed function ends up being something like this Original version This is basically what the Python interpreter does with the above code For more insight as to what's happening behind the scenes, theforloop can be rewritten to this Does that make more sense or just confuse you more? I should note that thisisan oversimplification for illustrative purposes. Comments Add a comment Theyieldkeyword is reduced to two simple facts In a nutshell Most commonly,a generator is a lazy, incrementally pending list, andyieldstatements allow you to use function notation to program the list valuesthe generator should incrementally spit out.Furthermore, advanced usage lets you use generators as coroutines see below . Basically, whenever theyieldstatement is encountered, the function pauses and saves its state, then emits the next return value in the 'list' according to the python iterator protocol to some syntactic construct like a for loop that repeatedly callsnext and catches aStopIterationexception, etc. . You might have encountered generators withgenerator expressions generator functions are more powerful because you can pass arguments back into the paused generator function, using them to implement coroutines. More on that later. Basic Example 'list' Let's define a functionmakeRangethat's just like Python'srange. CallingmakeRange n RETURNS A GENERATOR To force the generator to immediately return its pending values, you can pass it intolist just like you could any iterable Comparing the example to just returning a list The above example can be thought of as merely creating a list that you append to and return There is one major difference, though see the last section. How you might use generators An iterable is the last part of a list comprehension, and all generators are iterable, so they're often used like so To get a better feel for generators, you can play around with theitertoolsmodule be sure to usechain.from iterablerather thanchainwhen warranted . For example, you might even use generators to implement infinitely long lazy lists likeitertools.count . You could implement your owndef enumerate iterable zip count , iterable , or alternatively do so with theyieldkeyword in a while loop. Please note generators can actually be used for many more things, such asimplementing coroutines, non deterministic programming, and other elegant things. However, the lazy lists viewpoint I present here is the most common use you will find. Behind the scenes This is how the Python iteration protocol works. That is, what is going on when you dolist makeRange . This is what I describe earlier as a lazy, incremental list . The built in functionnext just calls the objects.next function, which is a part of the iteration protocol and is found on all iterators. You can manually use thenext function and other parts of the iteration protocol to implement fancy things, usually at the expense of readability, so try to avoid doing that... Coroutines Coroutineexample A coroutine generators that generally accept input via theyieldkeyword e.g.nextInput yield nextOutput, as a form of two way communication is basically a computation that is allowed to pause itself and request input e.g. to what it should do next . When the coroutine pauses itself when the running coroutine eventually hits ayieldkeyword , the computation is paused and control is inverted yielded back to the 'calling' function the frame which requested thenextvalue of the computation . The paused generator coroutine remains paused until another invoking function possibly a different function context requests the next value to unpause it usually passing input data to direct the paused logic interior to the coroutine's code . You can think of Python coroutines as lazy incrementally pending lists, where the next element doesn't just depend on the previous computation but also on input that you may opt to inject during the generation process. Minutiae Normally, most people would not care about the following distinctions and probably want to stop reading here. In Python speak, aniterableis any object which understands the concept of a for loop like a list ,, , and aniteratoris a specific instance of the requested for loop like ,, .iter . Ageneratoris exactly the same as any iterator, except for the way it was written with function syntax . When you request an iterator from a list, it creates a new iterator. However, when you request an iterator from an iterator which you would rarely do , it just gives you a copy of itself. Thus, in the unlikely event that you are failing to do something like this... ... then remember that a generator is aniterator that is, it is one time use. If you want to reuse it, you should callmyRange ... again. If you need to use the result twice, convert the result to a list and store it in a variablex list myRange . Those who absolutely need to clone a generator for example, who are doing terrifyingly hackish metaprogramming can useitertools.tee still works in Python if absolutely necessary, since thecopyable iterator Python PEP standards proposalhas been deferred. Comments Add a comment What does theyieldkeyword do in Python? Answer Outline Summary Generators yieldis only legal inside of a function definition, andthe inclusion ofyieldin a function definition makes it return a generator. The idea for generators comes from other languages see footnote with varying implementations. In Python's Generators, the execution of the code isfrozenat the point of the yield. When the generator is called methods are discussed below execution resumes and then freezes at the next yield. yieldprovides an easy way ofimplementing the iterator protocol, defined by the following two methods iterandnext. Both of those methods make an object an iterator that you could type check with theIteratorAbstract Base Class from thecollectionsmodule. Let's do some introspection The generator type is a sub type of iterator And if necessary, we can type check like this A feature of anIteratoris that once exhausted, you can't reuse or reset it You'll have to make another if you want to use its functionality again see footnote One can yield data programmatically, for example The above simple generator is also equivalent to the below as of Python . you can useyield from However,yield fromalso allows for delegation to subgenerators, which will be explained in the following section on cooperative delegation with sub coroutines. Coroutines yieldforms an expression that allows data to be sent into the generator see footnote Here is an example, take note of thereceivedvariable, which will point to the data that is sent to the generator First, we must queue up the generator with the built in function,next. It will call the appropriatenextornextmethod, depending on the version of Python you are using And now we can send data into the generator. SendingNoneis the same as callingnext. Cooperative Delegation to Sub Coroutine withyield from Now, recall thatyield fromis available in Python . This allows us to delegate coroutines to a subcoroutine And now we can delegate functionality to a sub generator and it can be used by a generator just as above Now simulate adding another , to the account plus the return on the account . You can read more about the precise semantics ofyield frominPEP . Other Methods close and throw Theclosemethod raisesGeneratorExitat the point the function execution was frozen. This will also be called bydelso you can put any cleanup code where you handle theGeneratorExit You can also throw an exception which can be handled in the generator or propagated back to the user Raises Conclusion I believe I have covered all aspects of the following question What does theyieldkeyword do in Python? It turns out thatyielddoes a lot. I'm sure I could add even more thorough examples to this. If you want more or have some constructive criticism, let me know by commenting below. Appendix Critique of the Top Accepted Answer The top accepted answer is a very incomplete answer. Critique of answer suggestingyieldin a generator expression or comprehension. The grammar currently allows any expression in a list comprehension. Since yield is an expression, it has been touted by some as interesting to use it in comprehensions or generator expression in spite of citing no particularly good use case. The CPython core developers arediscussing deprecating its allowance. Here's a relevant post from the mailing list On January at , Brett Cannon wrote On Sun, Jan at Craig Rodrigues wrote I'm OK with either approach. Leaving things the way they are in Python is no good, IMHO. My vote is it be a SyntaxError since you're not getting what you expect from the syntax. I'd agree that's a sensible place for us to end up, as any code relying on the current behaviour is really too clever to be maintainable. In terms of getting there, we'll likely want Cheers, Nick. Nick Coghlan ncoghlan at gmail.com Brisbane, Australia Further, there is anoutstanding issue which seems to be pointing in the direction of thisneverbeing a good idea PyPy, a Python implementation written in Python, is already raising syntax warnings. Bottom line, until the developers of CPython tell us otherwise Don't putyieldin a generator expression or comprehension. Thereturnstatement in a generator InPython In a generator function, thereturnstatement indicates that the generator is done and will causeStopIterationto be raised. The returned value if any is used as an argument to constructStopIterationand becomes theStopIteration.valueattribute. Historical note, inPython In a generator function, thereturnstatement is not allowed to include anexpression list. In that context, a barereturnindicates that the generator is done and will causeStopIterationto be raised. Anexpression listis basically any number of expressions separated by commas essentially, in Python , you can stop the generator withreturn, but you can't return a value. Footnotes The languages CLU, Sather, and Icon were referenced in the proposal to introduce the concept of generators to Python. The general idea is that a function can maintain an internal state and yield intermediate data points on demand by the user. This promised to besuperior in performance to other approaches, including Python threading, which isn't even available on some systems. This means, for example, thatrangeobjects aren'tIterators, even though they are iterable, because they can be reused. Like lists, theiritermethods return iterator objects. yieldwas originally introduced as a statement, meaning that it could only appear at the beginning of a line in a code block. Nowyieldcreates a yield expression.https docs.python.org reference simplestmts.htmlgrammar token yieldstmtThis change wasproposedto allow a user to send data into the generator just as one might receive it. To send data, one must be able to assign it to something, and for that, a statement just won't work. Comments Add a comment yieldis just likereturn it returns whatever you tell it to as a generator . The difference is that the next time you call the generator, execution starts from the last call to theyieldstatement. Unlike return,the stack frame is not cleaned up when a yield occurs, however control is transferred back to the caller, so its state will resume the next time the function is called. In the case of your code, the functiongetchildcandidatesis acting like an iterator so that when you extend your list, it adds one element at a time to the new list. list.extendcalls an iterator until it's exhausted. In the case of the code sample you posted, it would be much clearer to just return a tuple and append that to the list. Comment Add a comment There's one extra thing to mention a function that yields doesn't actually have to terminate. I've written code like this Then I can use it in other code like this It really helps simplify some problems, and makes some things easier to work with. Comments Add a comment For those who prefer a minimal working example, meditate on this interactive Python session Comments Add a comment TL DR Instead of this do this Whenever you find yourself building a list from scratch,yieldeach piece instead. This was my first aha moment with yield. yieldis asugaryway to say build a series of stuff Same behavior Different behavior Yield issingle pass you can only iterate through once. When a function has a yield in it we call it agenerator function. And aniteratoris what it returns. Those terms are revealing. We lose the convenience of a container, but gain the power of a series that's computed as needed, and arbitrarily long. Yield islazy, it puts off computation. A function with a yield in itdoesn't actually execute at all when you call it.It returns aniterator objectthat remembers where it left off. Each time you callnext on the iterator this happens in a for loop execution inches forward to the next yield.returnraises StopIteration and ends the series this is the natural end of a for loop . Yield isversatile. Data doesn't have to be stored all together, it can be made available one at a time. It can be infinite. If you needmultiple passesand the series isn't too long, just calllist on it Brilliant choice of the wordyieldbecauseboth meaningsapply yield produce or provide as in agriculture ...provide the next data in the series. yield give way or relinquish as in political power ...relinquish CPU execution until the iterator advances. Comments Add a comment It's returning a generator. I'm not particularly familiar with Python, but I believe it's the same kind of thing asC's iterator blocksif you're familiar with those. The key idea is that the compiler interpreter whatever does some trickery so that as far as the caller is concerned, they can keep calling next and it will keep returning values as if the generator method was paused. Now obviously you can't really pause a method, so the compiler builds a state machine for you to remember where you currently are and what the local variables etc look like. This is much easier than writing an iterator yourself. Comment Add a comment Yield gives you a generator. As you can see, in the first casefooholds the entire list in memory at once. It's not a big deal for a list with elements, but what if you want a list of million? Not only is this a huge memory eater, it also costs a lot of time to build at the time that the function is called. In the second case,barjust gives you a generator. A generator is an iterable which means you can use it in aforloop, etc, but each value can only be accessed once. All the values are also not stored in memory at the same time the generator object remembers where it was in the looping the last time you called it this way, if you're using an iterable to say count to billion, you don't have to count to billion all at once and store the billion numbers to count through. Again, this is a pretty contrived example, you probably would use itertools if you really wanted to count to billion. This is the most simple use case of generators. As you said, it can be used to write efficient permutations, using yield to push things up through the call stack instead of using some sort of stack variable. Generators can also be used for specialized tree traversal, and all manner of other things. Comment Add a comment Here is an example in plain language. I will provide a correspondence between high level human concepts to low level Python concepts. I want to operate on a sequence of numbers, but I don't want to bother myself with the creation of that sequence, I want only to focus on the operation I want to do. So, I do the following This is what a generator does a function that contains ayield it starts executing on the firstnext , pauses whenever it does ayield, and when asked for thenext value it continues from the point it was last. It fits perfectly by design with the iterator protocol of Python, which describes how to sequentially request values. The most famous user of the iterator protocol is theforcommand in Python. So, whenever you do a it doesn't matter ifsequenceis a list, a string, a dictionary or a generatorobjectlike described above the result is the same you read items off a sequence one by one. Note thatdefining a function that contains ayieldkeyword is not the only way to create a generator it's just the easiest way to create one. For more accurate information, read aboutiterator types, theyield statement, andgeneratorsin the Python documentation. Comments Add a comment There is one type of answer that I don't feel has been given yet, among the many great answers that describe how to use generators. Here is the programming language theory answer Theyieldstatement in Python returns a generator. A generator in Python is a function that returnscontinuations and specifically a type of coroutine, but continuations represent the more general mechanism to understand what is going on . Continuations in programming languages theory are a much more fundamental kind of computation, but they are not often used, because they are extremely hard to reason about and also very difficult to implement. But the idea of what a continuation is, is straightforward it is the state of a computation that has not yet finished. In this state, the current values of variables, the operations that have yet to be performed, and so on, are saved. Then at some point later in the program the continuation can be invoked, such that the program's variables are reset to that state and the operations that were saved are carried out. Continuations, in this more general form, can be implemented in two ways. In thecall ccway, the program's stack is literally saved and then when the continuation is invoked, the stack is restored. In continuation passing style CPS , continuations are just normal functions only in languages where functions are first class which the programmer explicitly manages and passes around to subroutines. In this style, program state is represented by closures and the variables that happen to be encoded in them rather than variables that reside somewhere on the stack. Functions that manage control flow accept continuation as arguments in some variations of CPS, functions may accept multiple continuations and manipulate control flow by invoking them by simply calling them and returning afterwards. A very simple example of continuation passing style is as follows In this very simplistic example, the programmer saves the operation of actually writing the file into a continuation which can potentially be a very complex operation with many details to write out , and then passes that continuation i.e, as a first class closure to another operator which does some more processing, and then calls it if necessary. I use this design pattern a lot in actual GUI programming, either because it saves me lines of code or, more importantly, to manage control flow after GUI events trigger. The rest of this post will, without loss of generality, conceptualize continuations as CPS, because it is a hell of a lot easier to understand and read. Now let's talk about generators in Python. Generators are a specific subtype of continuation. Whereascontinuations are able in general to save the state of acomputation i.e., the program's call stack ,generators are only able to save the state of iteration over aniterator. Although, this definition is slightly misleading for certain use cases of generators. For instance This is clearly a reasonable iterable whose behavior is well defined each time the generator iterates over it, it returns and does so forever . But it isn't probably the prototypical type of iterable that comes to mind when thinking of iterators i.e.,for x in collection do something x . This example illustrates the power of generators if anything is an iterator, a generator can save the state of its iteration. To reiterate Continuations can save the state of a program's stack and generators can save the state of iteration. This means that continuations are more a lot powerful than generators, but also that generators are a lot, lot easier. They are easier for the language designer to implement, and they are easier for the programmer to use if you have some time to burn, try to read and understandthis page about continuations and call cc . But you could easily implement and conceptualize generators as a simple, specific case of continuation passing style Wheneveryieldis called, it tells the function to return a continuation. When the function is called again, it starts from wherever it left off. So, in pseudo pseudocode i.e., not pseudocode, but not code the generator'snextmethod is basically as follows where theyieldkeyword is actually syntactic sugar for the real generator function, basically something like Remember that this is just pseudocode and the actual implementation of generators in Python is more complex. But as an exercise to understand what is going on, try to use continuation passing style to implement generator objects without use of theyieldkeyword. Comments Add a comment While a lot of answers show why you'd use ayieldto create a generator, there are more uses foryield. It's quite easy to make a coroutine, which enables the passing of information between two blocks of code. I won't repeat any of the fine examples that have already been given about usingyieldto create a generator. To help understand what ayielddoes in the following code, you can use your finger to trace the cycle through any code that has ayield. Every time your finger hits theyield, you have to wait for anextor asendto be entered. When anextis called, you trace through the code until you hit theyield the code on the right of theyieldis evaluated and returned to the caller then you wait. Whennextis called again, you perform another loop through the code. However, you'll note that in a coroutine,yieldcan also be used with asend which will send a value from the callerintothe yielding function. If asendis given, thenyieldreceives the value sent, and spits it out the left hand side then the trace through the code progresses until you hit theyieldagain returning the value at the end, as ifnextwas called . For example Comment Add a comment There is anotheryielduse and meaning since Python . FromPEP Syntax for Delegating to a Subgenerator A syntax is proposed for a generator to delegate part of its operations to another generator. This allows a section of code containing 'yield' to be factored out and placed in another generator. Additionally, the subgenerator is allowed to return with a value, and the value is made available to the delegating generator. The new syntax also opens up some opportunities for optimisation when one generator re yields values produced by another. Moreoverthiswill introduce since Python . to avoid coroutines being confused with a regular generator todayyieldis used in both . Comments Add a comment All great answers, however a bit difficult for newbies. I assume you have learned thereturnstatement. As an analogy,returnandyieldare twins.returnmeans 'return and stop' whereas 'yield means 'return, but continue' Run it See, you get only a single number rather than a list of them.returnnever allows you prevail happily, just implements once and quit. Replacereturnwithyield Now, you win to get all the numbers. Comparing toreturnwhich runs once and stops,yieldruns times you planed. You can interpretreturnasreturn one of them, andyieldasreturn all of them. This is callediterable. It's the core aboutyield. The difference between a listreturnoutputs and the objectyieldoutput is You will always get , , from a list object but only could retrieve them from 'the objectyieldoutput' once. So, it has a new namegeneratorobject as displayed inOut . In conclusion, as a metaphor to grok it Comment Add a comment From a programming viewpoint, the iterators are implemented asthunks. To implement concepts such as iterators, generators, concurrent execution via messages, etc., one usesmessages sent to a closure object, which has a dispatcher, and thedispatcher answers to messages this concept comes from Simula and is the central part ofSmalltalk . next is a message sent to a closure, created by the iter call. There are lots of ways to implement this computation. I used mutation, but it is possible to do this kind of computation without mutation, by returning the current value and the next yielder making itreferential transparent . Racket uses a sequence of transformations of the initial program in some intermediary languages, one of such rewriting making the yield operator to be transformed in some language with simpler operators. Here is a demonstration of how yield could be rewritten, which uses the structure ofRRS, but the semantics is identical to Python's. It's the same model of computation, and only a change in syntax is required to rewrite it using yield of Python. Comments Add a comment Here are some Python examples of how to actually implement generators as if Python did not provide syntactic sugar for them As a Python generator Using lexical closures instead of generators Using object closures instead of generators becauseClosuresAndObjectsAreEquivalent Comments Add a comment I was going to post read page of Beazley's 'Python Essential Reference' for a quick description of generators , but so many others have posted good descriptions already. Also, note thatyieldcan be used in coroutines as the dual of their use in generator functions. Although it isn't the same use as your code snippet, yield can be used as an expression in a function. When a caller sends a value to the method using thesend method, then the coroutine will execute until the next yield statement is encountered. Generators and coroutines are a cool way to set up data flow type applications. I thought it would be worthwhile knowing about the other use of theyieldstatement in functions. Comments Add a comment Here is a simple example Output I am not a Python developer, but it looks to meyieldholds the position of program flow and the next loop start from yield position. It seems like it is waiting at that position, and just before that, returning a value outside, and next time continues to work. It seems to be an interesting and nice ability D Comment Add a comment Here is a mental image of whatyielddoes. I like to think of a thread as having a stack even when it's not implemented that way . When a normal function is called, it puts its local variables on the stack, does some computation, then clears the stack and returns. The values of its local variables are never seen again. With ayieldfunction, when its code begins to run i.e. after the function is called, returning a generator object, whosenext method is then invoked , it similarly puts its local variables onto the stack and computes for a while. But then, when it hits theyieldstatement, before clearing its part of the stack and returning, it takes a snapshot of its local variables and stores them in the generator object. It also writes down the place where it's currently up to in its code i.e. the particularyieldstatement . So it's a kind of a frozen function that the generator is hanging onto. Whennext is called subsequently, it retrieves the function's belongings onto the stack and re animates it. The function continues to compute from where it left off, oblivious to the fact that it had just spent an eternity in cold storage. Compare the following examples When we call the second function, it behaves very differently to the first. Theyieldstatement might be unreachable, but if it's present anywhere, it changes the nature of what we're dealing with. CallingyielderFunction doesn't run its code, but makes a generator out of the code. Maybe it's a good idea to name such things with theyielderprefix for readability. Thegicodeandgiframefields are where the frozen state is stored. Exploring them withdir .. , we can confirm that our mental model above is credible. Comments Add a comment Imagine that you have created a remarkable machine that is capable of generating thousands and thousands of lightbulbs per day. The machine generates these lightbulbs in boxes with a unique serial number. You don't have enough space to store all of these lightbulbs at the same time, so you would like to adjust it to generate lightbulbs on demand. Python generators don't differ much from this concept. Imagine that you have a function calledbarcode generatorthat generates unique serial numbers for the boxes. Obviously, you can have a huge number of such barcodes returned by the function, subject to the hardware RAM limitations. A wiser, and space efficient, option is to generate those serial numbers on demand. Machine's code Note thenext barcode bit. As you can see, we have a self contained function to generate the next unique serial number each time. This function returns agenerator! As you can see, we are not calling the function each time we need a new serial number, but instead we are usingnext given the generator to obtain the next serial number. Lazy Iterators To be more precise, this generator is alazy iterator! An iterator is an object that helps us traverse a sequence of objects. It's calledlazybecause it does not load all the items of the sequence in memory until they are needed. The use ofnextin the previous example is theexplicitway to obtain the next item from the iterator. Theimplicitway is using for loops This will print barcodes infinitely, yet you will not run out of memory. In other words, a generatorlooks likea function butbehaves likean iterator. Real world application? Finally, real world applications? They are usually useful when you work with big sequences. Imagine reading ahugefile from disk with billions of records. Reading the entire file in memory, before you can work with its content, will probably be infeasible i.e., you will run out of memory . Comments Add a comment An easy example to understand what it is yield The output is Comments Add a comment Like every answer suggests,yieldis used for creating a sequence generator. It's used for generating some sequence dynamically. For example, while reading a file line by line on a network, you can use theyieldfunction as follows You can use it in your code as follows Execution Control Transfer gotcha The execution control will be transferred from getNextLines to theforloop when yield is executed. Thus, every time getNextLines is invoked, execution begins from the point where it was paused last time. Thus in short, a function with the following code will print Comments Add a comment In summary, theyieldstatement transforms your function into a factory that produces a special object called ageneratorwhich wraps around the body of your original function. When thegeneratoris iterated, it executes your function until it reaches the nextyieldthen suspends execution and evaluates to the value passed toyield. It repeats this process on each iteration until the path of execution exits the function. For instance, simply outputs The power comes from using the generator with a loop that calculates a sequence, the generator executes the loop stopping each time to 'yield' the next result of the calculation, in this way it calculates a list on the fly, the benefit being the memory saved for especially large calculations Say you wanted to create a your ownrangefunction that produces an iterable range of numbers, you could do it like so, and use it like this But this is inefficient because Luckily Guido and his team were generous enough to develop generators so we could just do this Now upon each iteration a function on the generator callednext executes the function until it either reaches a 'yield' statement in which it stops and 'yields' the value or reaches the end of the function. In this case on the first call,next executes up to the yield statement and yield 'n', on the next call it will execute the increment statement, jump back to the 'while', evaluate it, and if true, it will stop and yield 'n' again, it will continue that way until the while condition returns false and the generator jumps to the end of the function. Comments Add a comment My below answer only speaks from the perspective of using Python generator, not theunderlying implementation of generator mechanism, which involves some tricks of stack and heap manipulation. Whenyieldis used instead of areturnin a python function, that function is turned into something special calledgenerator function. That function will return an object ofgeneratortype.Theyieldkeyword is a flag to notify the python compiler to treat such function specially.Normal functions will terminate once some value is returned from it. But with the help of the compiler, the generator functioncan be thought ofas resumable. That is, the execution context will be restored and the execution will continue from last run. Until you explicitly call return, which will raise aStopIterationexception which is also part of the iterator protocol , or reach the end of the function. I found a lot of references aboutgeneratorbut thisonefrom thefunctional programming perspectiveis the most digestable. Now I want to talk about the rationale behindgenerator, and theiteratorbased on my own understanding. I hope this can help you grasp theessential motivationof iterator and generator. Such concept shows up in other languages as well such as C. As I understand, when we want to process a bunch of data, we usually first store the data somewhere and then process it one by one. But thisnaiveapproach is problematic. If the data volume is huge, it's expensive to store them as a whole beforehand.So instead of storing thedataitself directly, why not store some kind ofmetadataindirectly, i.e.the logic how the data is computed. There are approaches to wrap such metadata. Either way, an iterator is created, i.e. some object that can give you the data you want. The OO approach may be a bit complex. Anyway, which one to use is up to you. Comments Add a comment Yield is an object Areturnin a function will return a single value. If you wanta function to return a huge set of values, useyield. More importantly,yieldis abarrier. like barrier in the CUDA language, it will not transfer control until it gets completed. That is, it will run the code in your function from the beginning until it hitsyield. Then, it ll return the first value of the loop. Then, every other call will run the loop you have written in the function one more time, returning the next value until there isn't any value to return. Comments Add a comment Many people usereturnrather thanyield, but in some casesyieldcan be more efficient and easier to work with. Here is an example whichyieldis definitely best for return in function yield in function Calling functions Both functions do the same thing, butyielduses three lines instead of five and has one less variable to worry about. This is the result from the code As you can see both functions do the same thing. The only difference isreturndates gives a list andyielddates gives a generator. A real life example would be something like reading a file line by line or if you just want to make a generator. Comments Add a comment Theyieldkeyword simply collects returning results. Think ofyieldlikereturn Comments Add a comment yieldis like a return element for a function. The difference is, that theyieldelement turns a function into a generator. A generator behaves just like a function until something is 'yielded'. The generator stops until it is next called, and continues from exactly the same point as it started. You can get a sequence of all the 'yielded' values in one, by callinglist generator . Comments Add a comment Start asking to get answers Find the answer to your question by asking. Explore related questions See similar questions with these tags. Try Stack Overflow for Agents Paste this into your AI coding assistant Supports Claude Code, Cursor, Codex, Windsurf and more. Linked Related Subscribe to RSS To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.